kayekaci isyaku bala ibrahim musukanna na è lo tun woncinko na mi yi ò yagi gusa egi kpansanná tun-à-lo gá mi yi ò mi è ge enya mi ma è nyì enya mi à yizhe sà mi à yizhe nyì yekpa dèdè na è ma etun swakwa na mi ma à gunbe yekpa bodi na à tsoci mi gbadza na e lugwa mi kpé ye ti nyakagi ndondo yi be tsoci ù nyi mi ma à bagwadan tsoci dèdè ò na à lefi sòkó zhe edzo na tsoci na è la mi lá gurawó ke kunsa lá èdo guzha na guta gonyi ò wun jin mi ka gbóta wangi gonyi ò wun jin mi ka dèdè mi è nyì enya gán radi radi gá enya tegun mi è la ù wu kponyi mi le eba ye be à re wunga la mi ce tùn egya wunjin ecin gbani yekpa tsoci mi zhegba ce pama be tankpolo-tanza nyi ò wurunyebo ci à zhe eya ya wun ò tsoci mi wun à mi jingun mi à zhe tsukun egunjin mi è wa zhizhin yizhele mi gancin zhi à bò mi nyi ò da kafina mi tan yizhe fi na .
by isyaku bala ibrahim egbazun ya we bolo-bolo jin nyá we wun à mi kugba dankin boye ci à nyagban mi gbadza jin karanyi boye è gan esungan boyeci wunjin bayiba re wun ma jin boyibali à cincin gá wun è yi wun ò mi à fa wuru na cincin kan na mi à le gun kata na cincin tú na yizhe eza gubà nana zhiko gá yi enábán a ò na è ye dzodzo daga sìsábó lo dzakanbó na na la kagbo be bola è won dozhigun bambe kakpe nyi oh !
cincin kpe ayibu à ezananvo ma go éyéshi à ama mi à zungba zun ?
by isyaku bala ibrahim ètàn ebàci adi lo cigbanzhi lo cikan na tsoba na ò , na wun è zhin èmì na wun à wò na bici wun à lukpin na , ce duwan gan ko eká tuntun à ni ebona gbako pwarwa wun à kun éló nyi só .
wun ci à jin gbónyi gi danna nìní ò be kara cigban è ta eti ù bo na dìn kpe kongó è be èka è na .
éyé wun è cin enù è , be èwò ù ma da kpamba è ke wun min nuwon min kpe ù na wun fu ènù ge na .
etán na wun è wó na wun è jin ke wun foti ù be kara cigbanzhi na .
kara nyá cigban na ù la na ma è ló ù danna hari be èmì ci ya cigban na ù la na .
wun kpékpé da kata-tako ù sannyi banbe emisa kendo na ù dayé wunga zhin cigbanzhi na .
na wun lo kata ù na asha hankali tsudo ù wun à tu ù ebo kata ù zheyé zhewú yeko katamba na zhin èmìnin na .
edaga ò wun à emitu ù lo kata .
kakayé tun kata na , wun à adi gbingan , oku !
eká tun tun à ni ?
nnnba aaah , adi è zhi ù gan be etánwo nyi .
oku , a èta wo cici sannyi kakayé gan ù ce ba ù zogun efin ta re .
wun à le ta zogun ci à egba ù gaya .
mi è be dan na , kakayé gan ù wun ci lo den .
da la swaka be eko bé nyi katatako mi bo ò vannyi , kakayé gan mámù be egunkpo è .
mámù na ma gansun be etiwuntso è na wun giyédan éyéshé nna ù ke wawa na .
mámù fe sheci da ku zhin .
wunci ki à mámù tunda eba nnadzwa , gan wun sanni wun bé .
ke de adi ci kura ò na .
da kakuna wun à gangan ù zo na wun gu ù gán ni .
wun ya nna ù ya gi bó panti elo be ezhinnyi , wunci da tsun adi a ci è ka nnagima .
nnadzwa de sa bici dan kata ò , eti wun è be kakayé gan nnadzwa na ù zheyé dan ù na .
din efe fi nin , wo ci ò da ù gwa zhin den be edungbin ì be kagbo è nnadzwa è gan adi .
mamaaaaa ooooo !
adi zhegan be etánwo è to edungbin kakayé à egwasun gbannyi .
nnadzwa fe go swaka to eko ci à dan ù wunci gan ù gan wun da ù gwa zhin be , ke de egi è tinya zhin den nyi à ni na .
wunde ma è gan ù acin wunci è jin ù , egi ma fe tinya sannyi .
kakayé fe tagwa go ù dan ede ò egwa nnadzwa ò .
kakayé ci da wulélé gwa , ay ye ooooooooooooo yi a ye oooyi a ye ooo yi ay ye ooooooo yiiii e da na ù kpa wulélé zo na , nyizagizhi fe sheci be nbaga .
barika , barika !
ma ke adi gá magi ò na ?
e gbingan .
kakayé ci zhi à gan , gbani gá wun è ma ù danna ò .
barika re , èká sòkó à tun ù a ci è be emisa re .
ki sòkó ya yi nyi ò ?
a ye egangbin be .
bagi ò ni , kakayé zhegan .
to ò , barika , barika , zení mini à bo ci ke à egwa sun èyè , ci ke à egwa na ke na ba mapa wunci da da wulélé gwa be , ay ye ooooooooo yiiiiii a ye oooo yii a ye oooo yii ay ye eeeeeeeee yiiiii kakayé ci ki à ye kpà be .
kura etaci nyá adi gá danna ò na .
wunga la egima nanatso yibaba ù saranyi à dozhin nyá caba , be ebaci na ù ma na à .
bagi nbagazhi ma da lati-efako kpátá .
yigidi ma yi ta tita ò .
kakayé ce wa zana wun à tun lo eba à lati ò na .
woye fe ganzhin be eci , nna !
ya-ndagi zhin à ni .
sòkó yebojin ! , yi ù be ya mi ványi kakaye gan ù .
ndagi zhin èmì zhin ebo dzúkùn na ndapayi la lotun be nyi na , éfú wun à kpefi gubà .
a ci tun ù zhin èmì woro nyi la zhi .
wun de tun èmì wun à kpe gan enya ninma dabe .
na wun è dazan be kata nyá adi na , wun à le nyizagizhi ye è gun , a ci è támi be dozhi be nyagbanfa è .
wun ce duwan nyana jin nbaga ò nyina na ò .
woye fe tinya ci wúnya yi ù gan , ya-ndagi , nna à magi bagi nna-yé ci gan mi yì wo nyi ò bé .
barika , ndagi gan .
ya-ndagi , barika !
sòkó à rayi ù gigún , nyizagi nazhi be emisazhi na è sa ù mi na wun è gogan lo eba nna ù na .
ndagi ci zhi à gan , barika yi kpátá , barika yi ganni wunci zheye lo eba woye ci gbi ù gan , babo nna dan ò ?
wun gun kata ù bo ò , woye ci zhi ù gan be egwa ta tun kata è .
ndagi ci kpébicí da tsun nna ù .
kakayé gá yi nyimi nusa nyá ndace ò , wuntso ci yi egi nusa nyá alhaji babatakò na mà ndakpayi , nma , ndagi , mámù , másin kpedozhi .
adi ma yi yawo woro nyá ndace .
wuntso ci ma salla be woye ci tu egiworo na ù ma gbani na .
adi ya ewan nyi tuyé na à jinfo .
wunci fe ba aduwa ù be sòkó è hari wun à gun eyá gunni na gá sòkó wùn ù giyé ya ò .
mima nyá egi nana wúgwa aduwa gò adi be nyagbanfa ezanbagazhi .
ndace gá yi egi nusa nyá ndazhitsu , alhaji babatako ò .
alhaji babatako yi be nyimi guba è : layi be nnakatsan è .
layi gá yi nyimi nusa ò wunci yi be egi nìní ì .
nnakatsan ci yi nyimi ebaci , wun ma tsu yabaci ci lu egi gubà gwa : nnakuli be sanda è .
a jin ezhi kpatafu ri be edunfe lafiya be ezhitsobagi ù zhi .
daga ebakpákó mungorozhi gá wo à ka nyi leyé ò wo gá ta yeko nyá ezhi nana ò a ci à ma ù goba .
yeko ezhi nana lo nin hari be ezhi na zhi fi nin-nin bo na .
nnako-layi ma gi lati è tun èkòzhi .
wun à tun èkò degi , wun lele degi ebo nakan ù sán dozhin panyi à na .
èkò na ù ma de tun daga lazhin ò na la shé akodo na ù bé be nyi na à .
oh , èkò ma ge eyá nana ò ge à ?
kashin mi kasha-ò-wodi gá tun èkò tun wo be à nyi ò .
wun è leyé le gan wun tsa dinnyi à nyi ò , wun kpaye lo ekuku wun bo à .
yigidi à wó mi ma la de èkò tun she akodo nana à .
wun è duwan .
na wun è duwan nanazhi nyagban ù bo na gá wun à wo yi yi ù ebakpákó bo .
wunjin mi gá mi è wo yi dan ò na à ?
wun à gangbin eti ù .
eeeehhh ! !
wun è yé to na wun è dinkun be bere ù nyi na .
wunjin ndagi ma è yi mi dan ò na ?
wun gbingan .
ke wo wó na ò , wun sami .
ndagi fe tun eba ù .
nnako fe yi é bá mi !
é bá mi , wo gá yi ò ?
wun gbingan vannyi .
ébá wo gá yi ò ni , ndagi zhi ù gan .
ndagi ci à cin dòkò ò ci da eba ù kocita ò bana ù kpèdòshì na be sangi-dòkò è sungwa .
ezan wo ma yi lafiya ?
ma ke nbo gá bo wo fe zhin ò na ò ?
nnako-layi è gbin ù .
egan bologi ndoci mi gbadza bé be nyi ò , amá mi à ta ù ya wo nyi à sayi yi gá egwa dan dozhi egwa ò bedzo .
ndagi gan be !
ki jin ò ?
efo yawo wo nyi à tuntun ?
nnako kpaye ci gan .
a a !
ndagi zhe ù gan be yima zunye nyi .
nna-adi à magi bagi gbani , wun gan be ù .
oku sòkó !
oku sòkó !
ke egi be egimayiwo jin na ò ?
nnako gbingan be enyànyá è .
a dan bo lafiya , sayi wotso à le egi wuncin yé kponbogi , ndagi zhe ù .
oku egi , ah , gawama nna , nnako be ninma nyi .
na nnako-layi wo egima nyá adi na edaga ò wun à évó ù zhi kudan dozhi be egwatso è ebo nyagbanfa nyá enyawu na ndagi wu yi ù na to ebayéle wun à bè .
edaga ò wun fe dzu évó ù zhi ta eti wunci à eti tun yeko èmì .
ndagi ma fe tú dòkò kpékpé lo latiko na wun à da tsun yegi ù zhi na .
èmì alhaji babatako à she be nyizagi nazhi bé emisa egima na .
ndondo à tun wunga gandan ci ga egi to egimayiwo sami .
nnadzwa ci go éyéladan egi dan egwa ò hari be efogutwabà yegboro ò , ek á na wun à ku évó ù zhi kpékpé na .
ekándondo na a gá magi be , a ci è wa éyéle ù na eká nana ò na , wunga éyéladan gansan èmì nanazhi hari be eká na efozhi à gun na be ganmi ù zhi .
ezami alaji babatako è fanyagban be etun ù zhi gán nyá nnagima nakenazhi .
nnagima guta gá dan ezhi nana bo , na yi be ezakundo na à tuti eza gba bè kpótwabà bè shitsun ì na .
wunde eyá danguruko na wun è la éyédan egima nyá nbabo nana ò na .
be sande nyá nbaga nyi , wun sa nyá èmì ndoci sajin tsuwó , wunde ebandoci à sayi nana gbani bedzo .
nnadzwa à fedun fe be egi tsò kansan ù bo .
wun ù funuwon be to cigbe gberezhi be finizhi la ya ù .
gbani , ezanyizagi ndocizhi fe gandan , wun fe la egi ba nyagban vannyi .
a nna to egi sami to nnadzwa tso .
adi ci à zhegan wangi be éyélòya nyi , gancin , nnadzwa zhe à gan kendo na ù gonyi na à .
edaga ò , adi à kpe wo gan enya nyì .
a tagwa gan a go egi egwa ù bo na , ndadzwa be titànyi wun à gan à , wun à lele uunnhhh .
egi nana jin na yi à la ci ke ya alibarika na yi à ?
mini à bo gbingan .
ke eza kan eza egi-woro nyi la na ò , ke wo kpe na , nupencizhi è gan , egwazhi to aduwazhi na ezazhi jin na gá yi kagbo to tswitswa ya egi to ezamizhi ò , amá gbani wun è lele , nnadzwa gan à .
wun à ge re !
yi de b é b é gan ya sa nna to egi mi , yi kpaye gan egan nana ma fi ezandoci à , ebwacin ò , yi nyi à jin ebó eg á , ndoci à gan na a nákin gan a nyi è dà na .
mi jinyebo ye saranyi be bibé ye nyi , ye kube etun lada è , adi dajin .
a fe kpékpé .
adi fe sannin da tsun nnadzwa wun wó nyana jin na .
nnadzwa ma wa wun gan gan nyana danbo na à ebona wun kpe ko wun à cinmi ya ezandoci eti egan nana bo à , ebona wun jin egan na a la za na ya à .
adi ke wú gan na wun à wondan yi to to na wunyi eti egi wun na , wun à ba ù na wun ga ù tswa ka nnadzwa tsoba à na .
ezadèdèzhi à lagba ebandondo , nyizagi wuncinzhi wuyé .
a bé bé na a jin egi we egun na ebo wun à kperi na , nnadzwa kpé eganyé .
ki wo kpa na wo gan wun à kperi na ò ?
adi gbingan be yedin nyi .
wun zo na è magi yiri nana kimi yi bo na efonanazhi ò na zhe tsúkún robo ya gaci to eshecizhi na , nnadzwa gan be bo .
zhe tsukún robo ya gaci to eshecizhi , ki we lili gan ò de ?
adi gan be nakankun nyi .
be emi gasikiya è yizhele egi wo yegboro wunjin kpedin à , wun yi enyasóci .
nyana la mi ci gan gan wun à kperi na dan ò na , nnadzwa kpe eganri .
amá , ke wo kpe egan na yekpa ma ù kezhe wo à na ò de ?
kashin gaci gá wotso yi ma ò ?
amá fa be mi nyi nna be egangbin wun gá tán we na , adi gbinganzhi be dansunnyi .
nnadzwa ci yima , ci la egwa tun ù ekpa ò ci gan ù gan wunga fushigban ma eti egan nazhi wun wó eti egi ù bo na ma , ke de wun de enya nazhi gonyi wun kpe na dokun .
ci ke gan ù gan kabo wun dan ezan bo à , a de gaci na à gomi gan wun yi gaci na à sayi de eba ga yiba ù saranyi .
ke de kutila nyá emiwon wun dan mini nyana a la gboka na .
wun yi nyana à lagba kin bagazhi ò na ke gacizhi to ebasancizhi è le eba yé na , to yizhele yegboro egimamangi ndondo na .
egimamangi sashi yi be yegboro wangi , sashi ma swakwa wun yi ò .
ndocizhi ma yegboro yizhele à tàtàcin bo a fi ò .
nazhi lagba saranyi à ci zo nyi de na gá yi nazhi yizhele à yegboro wun è ye dzatin à na .
nanazhi ga è sun gacizhi to èshècizhi dan ò .
english translation adi had gone to fetch firewood from a nearby bush ; on her way back , she all of a sudden felt she could not left her legs properly .
she started thinking , has the time come , it seems her heavy and protracted stomach is ready to bury the umbilical cord .
she suddenly stood still with the firewood well arranged on a kóngó resting comfortably on her head with the help of èka .
her face wet with the sweat running down from her head , her local blouse was damped from the back and armpit as if she sprinkles water on it .
the inner pains took-over as if she should free herself from one of the burden by doing away with the firewood .
she then summed up courage and managed to walk home amidst pains .
as she got home , she dropped the load carelessly and head straight to her room gently .
her partner and co-wife , whose hut is facing the entrance to the compound through katamba , noticed adi s going into her room restlessly without the usual greetings announcing her presence .
she followed immediately .
when kakayé got inside , she asked adi , sorry !
is it time ?
yessss oooh !
adi answered painfully .
sorry keep your legs calmly as kakayé helped her spread a stalk mat on the floor .
she met her on the bare floor though it was tiled with broken terracotta .
she moved to the mat and partly spread her legs .
give me some time , as kakayé moved out of the hut .
go and get me some swaka and dark soap in my hut quickly , kakayé spoke loudly to mámù who look slightly worried herself as she gazed at her mother s cloudy face stupidly .
mámù hurriedly went and brought the items .
she then sent mámù to go and fetch nnadzwa , the local nurse that she should hastily come , her attention is needed , and that adi is in labour .
before she should end her last statement , mámù had fled .
the mother just shook her head and went back to meet adi as they wait anxiously for the midwife's arrival .
as nnadzwa stepped into the hut , the head is coming out kakayé alarmed turning to nnadzwa .
breathe in some air , then push with great energy , nnadzwa instructed adi as she tap on her .
adi helplessly answered with a good push as kakayé held her tight .
nnadzwa then asked for swaka and soap and then used it and gave another instruction as the baby almost out .
adi gave the final push ; suddenly the baby arrives .
kakayé received it from nnadzwa full of excitement .
she then gave a loud and inviting yell .
ayyye ooooooooooooo yiiiiii a ye oooyiiii a ye ooo yiiii ayy ye ooooooo yiiii as she finished yelling , women from all angles trooped into the compound .
ooh congratulations !
they said as they got to adi s hut .
is it adi that gave birth ?
they enquired .
kakayé replied , she just delivered the baby .
well - done !
and congratulations , god s time has come , they said .
what did god reward us with ?
they asked again .
it s a baby boy , kakayé answered .
okay , congratulations !
they said as one of them held her nose immediately with one hand and use the other hand to cover her left ear and gave the loudest congratulatory yell , ay ye ooooooooooo yiiiii a ye oooo yiiii a ye oooo yiiii ay ye eeeeeeeee yiiiii as she pauses , kakayé gave another one too .
this is adi third delivery that could be the reason why she did not have much trouble in her labour as she had with her first , and second child .
the men of the compound had gone to the farm .
the sun is just at the centre .
kakayé is thinking of who to send to the farm to deliver the message on the new development .
then woye hurriedly entered saying , mother !
mother ! !
ya-ndagi is here .
thank god !
kakayé praised and felt relieved .
call him for me quickly , she instructed .
ndagi returned home to pick another ridger from the farm tools store as the one ndakpayi uses broke while ridging in the farm .
when he entered the compound he knew something exciting had happened .
and as he approaches adi s hut crowded with women exchanging pleasantries .
he struggles to gather his thoughts in an attempt to decode what had happened , then woye came out of her mother s hut and move towards him fast and said , brother , nna-adi just gave birth to a baby boy .
and mum said i should call you quickly .
okay , congrats !
ndagi said .
ya-ndagi , may allah let his soul live to inherit .
women greeted as he walked pass them to meet her .
ndagi replied , congratulations to you all , congratulations to us altogether .
he turned to woye and asked , where is mother ?
she is in her hut , woye answered pointing toward the direction of the hut .
ndagi then walked towards it quickly to meet her .
kakayé is the senior wife of ndace , the eldest son of alhaji babatako who gave birth to ndakpayi , nma , ndagi , mámù , and másin .
adi is the new wife of ndace .
she gave birth to woye and salla , and then followed by the new baby .
it took adi four good years before god wiped-off her tears .
the arrival of the new baby is a source of relieve to adi and happiness to the whole family .
ndace is the eldest son of the village head , alhaji babatako .
alhaji had two wives : layi and nnakatsan .
layi is the senior wife with only one child , ndace .
while nnakatsan is the second wife and she died last year leaving behind nnakuli and sanda .
nnako-layi has been in the farm since morning picking shea nuts .
she does the picking and resting at intervals as she cannot endure as in the past .
and the nuts she was able to gather could not fill the wide-bowl container she came with lots of thoughts in her mind .
oh , is it that shea nuts did not do well this year ?
or i kasha-ò-wodi is not good at picking again .
she could not come to terms with her age , so she sees her low output as her share laziness .
it s already noon and i have not fill this container , she queried .
as these occupied her thoughts , she suddenly remained calmer as she heard the chanting of her name from afar .
is it not me that that voice is calling ?
she asked , as the voice become clearer as it advanced towards her .
she answers as she struggles to make her voice as audible as possible .
is it not ndagi that is calling me ?
she asked .
how are you ?
she greeted .
ndagi approached with his horse almost to her position .
my husband , my husband ; are you the one ?
she asked impatiently yes !
i m the one , ndagi responded .
he immediately got down from the horse , and he heads towards where she stationed her things beside a shea tree where she stood with the horse-whip in his hand .
is everything well at all ?
were you coming from home ?
nnako-layi asked fervently yes !
i m here with good news , but i will not reveal it to you until we exchange hands , ndagi challenged .
what happened ?
is your marriage date fixed ?
she guessed .
ndagi answered with a shy smile .
nna-adi has just given birth to a baby now , he added .
thank you god !
thank you god !
how are the baby and the mother doing ?
she asked with some dance steps .
they are doing just fine , in fact you need to see the new baby , he is very big , he answered with emphasis .
good girl , ah , well done woman , she says cheerfully .
she quickly put together her things as the joy in her has brightens her sight for hearing this wonderful message from ndagi .
she lifted it gradually onto to her head , and heads straight home .
ndagi then mounted his horse and move towards the family farm miles away to meet the guys .
alhaji babatako s compound is filled with women each coming in to offer their congratulatory greetings for safe delivery .
they will enter and greet the mother and the baby .
while nnadzwa is exclusively in charge of the baby for the first seven days after which she packs her belongings .
in the event that there are two or more births at the same period , or in between , she shares the seating period among her patients alternating among the families with her strict instructions .
this particular family is more comfortable with her services .
there are three midwives in the moderate sized community with over three thousand five hundred people in all .
all these years she has been in charge of the midwife of the women in the compound .
luckily also for the compound , she just finished with another family yesterday and she has none except this for now .
nnadzwa is seated with the baby by her side .
she did all the washing and applied all the medicine of roots and herbs on the new born .
at this moment , some group of women enters the hut and she quickly grabbed the baby tight to herself .
then they greeted both adi and nnadzwa , adi nicely replied with cheers , while nnadzwa refused to respond pleasantly .
adi immediately suspected something is wrong .
when they offered to collect the baby , nnadzwa cunningly said , he is sleeping uunnhhh .
is this one not for us to carry and bless ?
one of them asked .
how can one deny another a baby , as you know our people do say , the hands and prayers of people are source of strength and protection to the baby and the family , but for now he is sleeping , nnadzwa calmly said .
okay ohh !
we just came to greet , the mother and her baby , but it seems someone is not happy with our presence , so we are on our way , another one said as they rose on their feet to go .
thank you very much for your rewarding visit , adi thanked .
they left .
adi hurriedly went back to meet nnadzwa to inquire about what had just happened .
nnadzwa was reluctant in telling her because she wasn t sure if adi could hold the information to herself , because it is a taboo to spread it .
adi persuaded that she should trust her in as much as the information is about her baby and so as to be extra careful when nnadzwa is not around .
there are treacherous people everywhere , those women are dangerous .
they were here to inflect something on your child because he is different , nnadzwa clarified .
what do you mean he is different ?
adi asked impatiently .
it is rare occurrence in our society these days to get such kind of children who the witches and wizards considered dangerous to their existence , nnadzwa added .
dangerous to witches and wizards , what did he do ?
how do you mean ?
adi says nervously .
frankly your baby s future is shrouded in mystery , very unpredictable .
that is what i meant by he is different , nnadzwa emphasized .
but , how do you know all these unimaginable things , are you a witch too ?
but forgive me if my questions upset you madam , adi asked fearfully .
nnadzwa smiled , and tapped her on the shoulder assuring her that she should not worry about what she heard about her baby , that she still has a lot to learn on this .
she added that even if she is not one of them , no witch or wizard agrees that she or he is one in whatever circumstance except if pushed to the wall .
the secrecy oath is part of their lives .
it is widely believed in the communities that witches and soothsayers can foresee the future of any new baby .
some new born babies have a promising future while others bad .
there is other category of new born that has moderate existence throughout their lives .
in few occasions some new babies are born without clear future .
these are the ones that threaten the people of the underworld .
kpatafu village is known for its peaceful co-existence with its neighbours until recently .
mango trees are what one sees as it approaches the village through the only road that connected it with other settlements before and after it .
eza na ka na isyaku bala ibrahim ebatin chibok tin be woro è efo na à bi egimakantazhi ezhi nana na na ma yi etswafo gwegi din nìní nyá etswa-ènici nasara na egizhi tí nyamanci à zhi kpamu tí makanta lo ye è lo ì zhin a gan ò èzhin ci be à nàyé hari wun à ma éyékodo makanta na a kpe elo a ci kpe ezhin à na gá dan ò na kila gbugbukecizhi de èyè à nyi ò ?
banvózhi à ezhi nana la dingbaro keyasácizhi na nna à zhi ma à ge à na nazhi è wú nyana de gbèrè kin babo à na nazhi è din tukpadèdè eti katun nasara jin ò na egizhi à gbinti dan kuso sambasi ò a gan na ò re kuso na a gan woncin gán kin najeriya na edzòshicizhi è mámi kafu nyado ma ye jin à danna zunyecinbo be ganmánázun nyá ekunguncizhi à lagba a lugwa yi kpe gbóró nyana è lo nyi na à nyimi edzoshici gbégí cincinbo eginanazhi wú yizhe bacina wun à lalítici à zhi kandan na ngba !
kici yi à li li wó be nyi ò ?
keyasáci nanazhi à de yemà gán kin kpátá danna ni zhi à bò yi nyi ò ?
sòkó yi nyi à bá we ce yi wú egwa egiminá-nanazhi ò re !
by isyaku bala ibrahim caba chapter one cincin yi konbeke zawangi tacin bagi be nyizagi wunjin ekun à , cincin gá wun yi ò .
fafan na de edzutá gán na wungá yi fafan cincin ò .
èkace gbángbán nyá zawangi kinkpátá ò gá yi ebalo cincin ò .
acinga enyajin na sagwa kudozhi gán na gá yi yèkpa to egun zawangi na à zhe èmì-èdzú cincin na , na tako ù bo gá yi kpatsunta den to nin nyá wun na .
nyana de egankpé kawonyi eba zawangizhi bo à na gá yi cincin ò .
ekándoro e la vwaya bedzo a ce be de janyi ù , tosun , wun zhe nyana è zo nyi kpe harilonyi na à , ce gikáya na , be gácibó to énában ù wunjin nyana ye navo wó na à .
cincin yi enyasusóci na yi tanganná na à bagi to nyizagi makezhe a ci à zhe nìní na .
ebwacin , be nakangbàn tetengi nyi wun è la èkinni woncinko bé nyi .
woma gá kò gun èsán ù bo à ni , kanga konbeke wuwayé ù ca ò .
tswitswanni ù gá ketó , wunci gá kpànkòrò na à lu ù na fin gbannyi , wunci à fe pá rayi ù lo eba tsutsu ko èsà .
kila nyana ètàn cincin kan na eká wuncin gá nyá ezandoci na ù won na è ná ò nyi ò ?
wo zhi ù yi ò na yi be cincin na ci be à cincin ndoci zhebu na ò ci wa wun kati ò na ò ?
ezanazhi à kó wun cincin ò .
nin nyá cincin ò , wawa bagizhi yi ò .
be a de cincin na à de cin babo à na à .
gbani , wun à yi nana gá yi konbeke nyá eza na à kó na ò , ki à lili jin cincin na gá sagwa kun egifunfuru na ò , na bawú ù gán nakansán gbwugi na à ?
ekpangba ù zhi ; tsobanyi , katunbonyi , wondannyi , be yèkpanyi a jin èkàce kpokizhi à .
éyékanzhin wò ya enya nyá ù shegwa à .
egunnin nyá gbarufu la kó na wun à go esungán cincin wó na à .
kagbó cincin è la ma enya kezhe wunci è la zhe kàrà na .
cincin jin nyá egifunfuru à amá a fe wó sansan ù ebó zawangibó à bo .
cincin titi guta ù yi ò : cincin sòkó , cincin yegi be cincin na dan tacin bagi be nyizagi ò na .
nyana yi ye baza eti ù bo babo nana ò na , gá yi cincin bagi be nyizagi na gbaketenyi wun è zo zo fi cin bedzo yawojin ò na , efo nanazhi ò na .
nin nyi ù bo , yi à ganganzhi eti kemina zawangi yi na , tabiya cin , sharyafu ù zhi , enyagagizhi cin be éyékpé cin nyi .
ye à nakin nyadozhi nijeriya g á yi , y é lotun ya kin nya yi to cincin be kagbo be wuwunyi etun na gorozo yizhi lo panyi na wun à ya à ni to enyajin na tun yekogi be nyagban è na kin n ìní na yapya , edunfe lafiya be emigun na k u yi keba na .
translated by ib ibrahim on 10th dhul-hijjah 1433 26th october 2012 nigerian national anthem arise , o compatriots , nigeria's call obey to serve our fatherland with love and strength and faith .
the labour of our heroes past shall never be in vain , to serve with heart and might one nation bound in freedom , peace and unity .
note that the numbering is not sequentially arranged : nupe arabic kurugi 0 ganfi nìní 1 gubà 2 guta 3 gunni 4 gutsun 5 gutswanyi 6 gutwabà 7 gutòtá 8 gutwani 9 guwò 10 guwò bè nìní 11 guwò bè gubà è 12 gwegi dín gubà 13 gwegi dín nìní 14 gwegi 15 gwegi bè nìní 16 gwegi bè gubà è 17 eshi dín gubà 18 eshi dín nìní 19 eshi 20 eshi bè nìní 21 eshi bè gubà è 22 eshi bè guta è 23 eshi bè gunni 24 eshi bè gutsun ì 25 eshi bè gutswanyi 26 eshi bè gutwabà 27 gbanwò dín gubà 28 gbanwò dín nìní 29 gbanwò 30 gbanwò bè nìní 31 gbanwò bè gubà è 32 rudin dín gubà 33 rudin dín nìní 34 rudin 35 rudin bè nìní 36 rudin bè gubà è 37 shibà dín gubà 38 shibà dín nìní 39 shibà 40 shibà bè nìní 41 shibà bè gubà è 42 shibà bè guta è 43 shibà bè gunni 44 shibà bè gutsun ì 45 shibà bè gutswanyi 46 shibà bè gutwabà è 47 aráta dín gubà 48 aráta dín nìní 49 aráta 50 aráta bè nìní 51 aráta bè gubà è 52 aráta bè guta è 53 aráta bè gunni 54 aráta bè gutsun ì 55 aráta bè gutswanyi 56 arata bè gutwabà è 57 shita dín gubà 58 shita dín nìní 59 shita 60 shita bè nìní 61 shita bè gubà è 62 shita bè guta è 63 shita bè gunni 64 shita bè gutsun ì 65 shita bè gutswanyi 66 shita bè gutwabà è 67 adwani dín gubà 68 adwani dín nìní 69 adwani 70 adwani bè nìní 71 adwani bè gubà è 72 adwani bè guta è 73 adwani bè gunni 74 adwani bè gutsun ì 75 adwani bè gutswanyi 76 adwani bè gutwabà è 77 shini dín gubà 78 shini bè nìní 79 shini 80 shini bè nìní 81 shini bè gubà è 82 shini bè guta è 83 shini bè gunni 84 shini bè gutsun ì 85 shini bè gutswanyi 86 shini bè gutwabà è 87 shini bè gutòtá è 88 shini bè gutwani 89 shini bè guwò è 90 shini bè guwò è tú nìní 91 shini bè guwò è tú gubà 92 shini bè guwò è tú guta 93 shini bè guwò è tú gunni 94 shini bè guwò è tú gutsun 95 shini bè guwò è tú gutswanyi 96 shini bè guwò è tú gutwabà 97 shitsun dín gubà 98 shitsun dín nìní 99 shitsun 100 shitsun bè nìní 101 shitsun bè gutsun ì 105 shitsun bè gutwani 109 shitsun bè guwò è 110 shitsun bè guwò è tú gunni 114 shitswanyi 120 shitswanyi bè gutsun è 125 shitswanyi bè gutwani 129 shitswanyi bè guwò è 130 shitswanyi bè guwò è tú gutsun 135 shitwabà 140 shitwabà bè gunni 144 shitwabà bè gutòtá è 148 shitwabà bè guwò è 150 shitwabà bè guwò è tú gutsun 155 wogbogunni dín gubà 158 wogbogunni dín nìní 159 wogbogunni shitwani 160 wogbogunni bè gutwani 169 wogbogunni bè guwò è 170 wogbogunni bè guwò tú gunni 174 gwásán dín nìní 178 gwásán shitòtá 180 gwásán bè gutsun è 185 gwásán bè gutòtá è 188 gwásán bè guwò è 190 gwásán bè guwò è tú gutsun 195 gwásán bè guwò è tú gutwabà 197 kpákó dín nìní 199 kpákó 200 kpákó bè guwò è 210 kpákó bè gwegi 215 kpákó bè eshi 220 kpákó bè gbanwò è 230 kpákó bè shibà dín gubà 238 kpákó bè shibà 240 kpákó bè arata è 250 kpákó bè shita è 260 kpákó bè shita tú guwò 270 kpákó bè shini dín gutwabà 273 kpákó bè shini dín nìní 279 kpákó bè shini 280 kpákó bè shini tú guwò 290 kpákó bè shitsun ì 300 kpákó bè shitsun tú aráta 350 kpóbà 400 kpóbà bè shini tú guwò 490 kpóbà bè shitsun ì 500 kpóbà bè shitsun ì tú shibà 540 kpóbà bè aráta 550 kpóta 600 kpóta bè shita è tú gutsun 665 kpóta bè shita è tú guwò 670 kpóta bè shitsun ì dín guta 697 kpóta bè shitsun ì 700 kpóta bè shitsun tú guwò 710 kpóta bè shitsun tú shini dín gubà 778 kpóni 800 kpóni bè shini tú gutwani 889 kpóni bè shitsun tú shini dín gubà 898 kpóni bè shitsun 900 kpóni bè shitsun tú shini 940 kpóni bè shitsun tú shini bè gutwabà 987 kpótsun dín nìní 999 kpótsun 1 000 kpótsun bè guwo è 1010 kpótswanyi bè aráta è 1250 kpótwabà 1400 kpótwabà bè shitsun è 1500 kpótwabà bè shitsun tú shita bè gutwabà 1567 kpótòtá 1600 kpótòtá bè eshi tú gutsun 1625 kpótòtá bè shitsun è 1700 kpótòtá bè shitsun tú shita bè guwò tú gutwabà 1777 kpótwani 1800 kpótwani bè shini dín nìní 1879 kpótwani bè shitsun gba dín shitsun 1900 gba dín gwegi bè nìní 1984 gba dín nìní 1999 gba 2 000 gba bè nìní 2 001 gba bè gutwani 2 009 gba bè eshi 2 020 gba bè shitsun è 2 100 gba bè kpák tú eshi bè guta 2 223 gba bè kpóni tú shita dín gunni 2 856 gba bè kpótsun è 3 000 gba bè kpák tú shitsun bè rudin din gubà 3 333 gbóbà dín kpóta 3 400 gbóbà din shitsun 3900 gbóbà 4 000 gbóbà bè kpóta din shibà 4 560 gbóbà bè kpótsun è 5 000 gbóbà bè kpóbà tú shitsun bè eshi tú guta 5 523 gbóta 6 000 gbóta bè kpóta è tú shita bè gutswanyi 6 666 gbóta bè kpótsun è 7 000 gbóta bè kpóbà tú eshi 7 420 gbóta bè kpóbà tú shitsun è 7 500 gbóta bè kpóni tú shita bè gutswanyi 7 866 gbóni dín eshi bè gunni 7 976 gbóni 8 000 gbóni bè kpóta è 8 600 gbóni bè kpótsun è 9 000 gbótsun dín nìní 9 999 gbótsun 10 000 gbótsun bè nìní 10 001 gbótsun bè shitsun tú nìní 10 101 gbótswanyi bè kpák tú gunni 12 204 gbótwabà bè kpótsun ì 15 000 gbótwabà bè kpótòtá tú shibà bè gutsun ì 15 645 gbótòtá 16 000 gbótòtá bè kpótsun è 17 000 gbaguwò 20 000 gbaguwò bè nìní tú kpótswanyi bè rudin 23 235 gbaguwò bè gubà è tú kpótsun 25 000 gbagwegi 30 000 gbashi 40 000 gbashi bè gutsun ì 50 000 gbashi bè gutwabà è , tú kpótòtá be shitsun , tú eshi bè guta è 55 723 gbagbanwò 60 000 gbagbanwò bè guta è , tú kpóta bè shita tú gutswanyi 66 666 gbarudin 70 000 gbashibà 80 000 gbashibà bè gutsun ì 90 000 gbashibà bè gutwani , tú kpótwabà bè shitsun è , tú shita bè gutòtá è 99 568 gbaráta 100 000 gbashita 120 000 gbashita bè gutwabà è , tú kpóbà bè shitsun 134 500 gbashita bè guwò è 140 000 gbashini bè guwò è 180 000 gbashitsun 200 000 gbashitswanyi 240 000 gbashitwabà bè guwò è , tú kpóbà bè shitsun tú gutòtá 300 508 gbakpákó 400 000 gbakpákó bè eshi tú gutsun 450 000 gbakpákó bè arata è 500 000 gbakpákó bè shitsun ì 600 000 gbakpákó bè shitsun bè arata è 700 000 gbakpákó bè shitwani tú gunni , tú kpákó bè shitsun ì , tú shibà bè gutsun ì 768 345 gbakpóbà 800 000 gbakpóba bè aráta è 900 000 kpótsutsùn 1 000 000 kpótsutsùn tú nìní 1 000 001 kpótsutsùn tú shitsun bè guta è 1 000 103 kpótsutsùn tú gbashi bè gutsun ì , tú kpákó bè aráta è 1 050 250 kpótsutsùn tú gbashitswanyi bè gutòtá è , tú kpák bè shitsun , tú shiba bè gutswanyi 1 256 346 kpótsutsùn tú gbakpák 1 400 000 kpótsutsùn tú gbakpák bè aráta è 1 500 000 kpótsutsùn tú gbakpák bè shitsun ì 1 600 000 kpótsutsùn tú gbakpóbà bè aráta è 1 900 000 kpótsutsùn édá eshi bè gubà è , tú gbakpák bè guwò è , tú kpóni bè shibà tú gutwabà 22 420 847 kpótsutsùn édá shitsun 100 , 000 000 kpótsutsùn édá kpák bè eshi tú gutsun , tú gbakpák bè shini tú guta , tú kpótwabà bè shitsun dín gubà 225 567 498 kpótsutsùn édá kpóbà bè shitsun è 500 000 000 kpótsutsùn édá kpóni bè shibà tú gutsun , tú gbakpák 890 400 000 kpótsutsùn édá kpótsun dín nìní 999 000 000 kpótsutsùn édá kpótsun 1 000 000 000 for more details , grab a copy of enyal ò nupe arithmetic by gandzo enterprises published in 2012 .
nupe proverbs menu coopills search for school law information american information biographies search for home nupe nupe proverbs nupe nupe proverbs share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram nupe proverbs author by our own isyaku bala ibrahim .
check table of content .
nupe proverb from the book eganmaganzhi nupe nupe proverbs .
wo kpe nyina na , wo kpe esun à .
if you know today you do not know tomorrow .
man is ignorant of the future .
tukpapa wun è lugwa tukpa tsu à .
a reminder does not cause dumbness .
a reminder does not cause harm rather it enlightens an individual .
erwagi gan séfu , wuntso ma na kin bo à .
the crippled draws attention to stand for prayers while he is still on the floor .
show a clear commitment towards something before asking others to emulate you .
eza ù la eda ù ya tun ka kun na wun è woma egwako na kacin à wun à be à ma ù zunye .
a person should leave the stage when the ovation is loudest or else he will shamefully leave it later .
people should do things at their appropriate times .
nangi ga e za be eshigi , wun à be à ca ebi nyi gi .
any sheep that follows a dog about will soon start eating faeces .
be careful in choosing a friend or a partner as he she might positively or negatively influence your life .
eza è de ekò dan egwa ò ede ù shishikan à .
no one in possession of soap will allow it clothes to remain dirty .
with adequate resources at one s disposal , one will solve alot of problems .
wun jin za è wun kuso na wun kana à .
it is not the person that owns the forest that owns its baboon .
you cannot be in contol of everythings .
egwa la mufu lo ená ò , a ma tsukun tsá ma à wa wun ò .
it is the hand that takes an iron-stove into a fire , but it is a stick that will bring it out .
people should be careful of the negative consequences of their actions .
éyé na shi na ékó na ; zana da ù na à masha .
the night has set-in on the road ; whoever will ply it must take caution .
whatever you do not have detailed explanation on should be treated with caution .
eza è gi yiwara zo vo wun kun gwa wun à .
a person does not finish eating a cooked grain-flour meal and wriggles his hands into the plate .
you cannot reverse what has been concluded .
wun jin na eza lé be nyi na , wun è san be nyi à .
it is not what a person sleeps with , that he orshe wakes up with .
life is generally dynamic , it is subject to changes .
nyana è li li na wun è zo zo .
what is picked consistently is consistently finishing .
people should be conscious of things they constantly use , as they will certainly finish .
zandondo ù la emi ù tú égún mi nda ù .
everyone should go by their inherited family norms .
people should always respect their family ethics .
kankuru na janfuru dan nuwon ò na be tsun yikán tsun .
a hippopotamus that just enters into the water meets the fish therein .
the new arrivers should give regards or respect the old hands .
nyana saka lo égó na , wun be tsun nyana lé égó na tsun .
whatever comes into the bush early in the morning meets what slept therein .
there are differences between old and and new things is clear .
nyana è ge eza na wun ga yizheci è nanvó , nyana ma è nyí eza na wun ga è dagun ò .
what will make an individual nice is avoided and what will make him bad is happily welcomed .
people find it difficult to do the right things .
wo gá gba ezako , efo de à yi efo wotso be de ezako ye .
if you are obedient to your superior , someday you will become one .
there is wisdom behind obedience and respect of superior .
nyagbanlaci è de enyandondo à .
a jealous person does not gain anything .
there is no any benefit for being jealous .
dagan yeshi ga bo è ca eci lazhin ò .
the morning race begins from the night .
the earlier the better .
it is always better to start a task early enough to meet the targeted result early enough .
eza è yi be kanwon è sungwa ò wun tán gbako à .
a person cannot be in possession of potash and have stomach ache .
when a person has a solution to a problem it should solve it or else it should not complain afterwards .
a ga è kín ò gongi má wa , wo fe tswa ewanko .
if you are praised for being a good hay harvester , be conscious of a python .
the applauded person should be cautious of making mistakes .
zawangi wun rayi à .
a man owns not it soul .
a man is not in control of it life .
it should therefore give maximum attention to whatever comes it way as soon as possible .
dagbá ku èsà , asara yi nya esatso .
an elephant that moved away with a net , the owner bears the lost .
whoever does not own a thing will show less concern if it is missen .
wo gá la yikuru dzodzo , madán à gun ò .
if you play with grain flour you will be hungry .
a person does not joke with where it gets it daily bread .
eza wún enya à wun de ewùnzhe ?
if a person does not own a thing , will it be angry over it ?
do not get angry over what does not belong to you .
wo yi da yi lo è , wotso ma ò la bicí ò kpé .
let us move forward , while you should also hastenly lead the way .
people should lead by example .
a gan majin ényà-donci à gbín , wo gan we gbigan ényà-donci .
the leader of mortar-drummers had sunk , and you are still demanding drums to be played .
this is used when a person is off-track or beating about the bush .
zana gba ebó ye na , wun ga ebo è kunmi .
whoever belittles the right reason , it will cause it problems someday .
always make use of the right decision or suggestion .
éyé dá wun má yékorogi à .
a treated eye will not produce eye-mucus .
a problem already solved will affect no one .
yi à lo , yi à lo ; wun ga è la zhi lo lokpa ò .
we will go , we will go ; is what makes a journey far .
to start a thing is what is always difficult .
bici ù tswa éwá , éwá ma ù tswa bici .
the leg should be careful with the snake and vice versa .
showing restrend is better than hurting one another .
tswa éyé !
tswa éyé !
gá yi cigbe éyé ò .
be careful with the eye ! !
is the best eye treatment .
prevention is better than cure .
dangi emi ga è won bishe emi ò .
it is a domestic cat that catches a chicken .
when you are familiar with a thing , you will know how to target or get it .
a la hankali à tswa lafiya .
make use of reasoning to make peace .
think before you act .
egi-ena ke nyizagi na ù yi ò , na gá pani wangi ná wun à fe ba zandondo , na ma pàni wangi à na è sa fi zandondo à .
a party-candidate is like a woman ; if she does her make-up very well , everyone will like her ; and if she does not , no one will like her .
always do your homework very well before doing any given task or aspiring for any position in life .
zana gbin nuwon be èwòko na wun gá nuwon è gbin ò .
whoever smims with a gown on will be drawn .
always do things rightly and avoid ambiguity .
kabo éyé-nnakogi nyaga wo be à , wun è ceka ba egi égí .
even if the aunty s eye cannot perform witchcraft anymore , but it does frightens a child .
what people have master will not easily fade away .
eza à ce ekpà , kin yaba ?
when one shoots an arrow does the ground get out of the way ?
do not expect impossibilities .
eni è zan eje wun kan gi gi wun à .
too much soup on solid-grain porridge will not prevent it from been eaten .
what must be done cannot be avoided .
eyiwárá ga pin dan èdò , nin nyi ù yi tsa tsa è .
if a grain of corn falls in the mud , the inside is still clean .
the truth or false cannot be concealed , it will surely come to be known .
yajinci jin nyana kagbo ù kun na .
the poor should go for what he can afford .
people should live within their means .
madangunci è kpe eje sánmu ye kperi à .
a hungry person does not know poisoned food .
extreme anxiety leads to obliteration .
yajinci è kpe shikanshi ede ù ye kperi à .
the poor does not differentiate between the dirt of his clothes .
this proverb is directed at people that do not find fault in whatever they do instead blame others .
eza bo bo kpa eshigi wun latswan be à ?
wo ga è tswan-tswan-nyi , eshigi gan wun dan na .
a person cannot keep a dog and hiss again ?
for any hissing sound made , the dog appears .
when someone is fed-up with a particular situation .
kara na nyagban pa na wun è lò eti à .
the luggage sensibly arranged will not be too heavy for the head to carry .
be very logical in carryout any assignment to guard against errors or mistakes .
read also nupe songs related articles nupe dictionary nupe proverbs nupe food popular nupe wise sayings from the book nupe the people of nigeria by yahya kuta read also nupe language translation 1 .
if a child is found walking in the night , there is an elder behind him .
if a child is climbing a tree with his hands relaxed , there is an elder holding and assisting him from below .
a patient should not be in a hurry to sleep , there is enough opportunity ahead in the grave .
they had wished you to sleep with hunger , but early the next morning you were seen eating prepared rice left over with chicken .
nobody sows good seed and reaps evil , nor will anybody who sows evil ever reap good result .
whatever you sow is what you reap .
hence , you do not sow millet and reap sorghum .
a child that answers for his father will be buried ahead of his father 7 .
nowadays , religious people are many , but godly people are few .
the person preserved by god will definitely be left alone by human being .
you don t go to the river with a basket , the way you go to the river with it is the same way you return with it .
the son of the soil is doing a bad thing , but it is that of the visitor that is obvious .
whatever is meant for a toad does not climb up .
tough aliyu aliyu is like whirled wind , aliyu is like thunderous rain , aliyu stays on top of mountain and sees next year , aliyu joined a canoe and the paddler says he is going down the slope , but aliyu insists on moving up stream .
kuta donbashi !
worthy praise for the leader of fishermen no man ever praises his wife , it is in the presence of a dog that an elephant enters the bush , and it is in her presence that the elephant will come out .
it is only cricket you catch , hold and break its legs but not a scorpion .
richness is not hereditary , poverty too is not inherited , you can be rich today and get poor tomorrow and you can also be poor today and become rich tomorrow .
if god relieves your burden throw away the carrier , but if human being should assist relieve your burden hold on to your carrier .
he that assists others is only helping himself ; equally , he that cheats on others is cheating himself because whatever you do to others will be paid back to you .
who is a blind man deceiving that he is sleeping ?
is there any difference between when he is awake or when asleep ?
it is from the point where farming starts that boundary demarcation is effected .
the tick koti that cow goes for grazing with , is that which kills a lamb .
fly that moves with a leopard will never eat rotten meat .
familiarity with a chicken does not prevent its slaughtering when needed .
a newly wedded young man must not go hunting for a buffalo or else the new bride will easily become a widow .
a widow should not celebrate , what took her husband is not yet fulfilled .
we should not be too proud , because grasses are growing on a mountain while others are dying in the fadama marshy land .
love breeds happiness while hatred breeds disaster .
the dog that will miss its way will never hear the sound of the whistle of its owner .
leave the dancing stage when the ovation is loudest , or else it is shame that will follow soon .
any goat that follows dog about will soon start eating faeces 30 .
if you dig a trench for a bird it will definitely come and pass ?
read also sokodeke biography have you found this useful or inspiring ?
do let know your thought by commenting below .
share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram facebook twitter linkedin pinterest reddit messenger messenger whatsapp telegram share via email nupe food nupe dictionary related articles nupe film list of nupe names traditional titles in nupe land nupe dressing nupe tribe nupe language translation leave a reply cancel reply check also close nupe etsu nupe top posts list of tribes in kaduna state nupe language translation assi college of health school fees rolim school of health minna nupe tribe diploma in law in nigeria how to apply for dubai visa from nigeria taraba state university school fees how to create webmoney account in nigeria towns in kwara state categories school 149 law information 61 information 35 american information 28 kenya schools 15 nupe 14 uganda 13 biographies 10 india schools 8 fulani and hausa 8 ghana laws 6 translator 4 usa schools 3 hotels 3 debate 3 kanuri 2 copyright 2026 , all rights reserved home about us terms and conditions privacy policy disclaimer contact us back to top button close search for : close search for
nupe archives menu coopills search for school law information american information biographies search for home nupe nupe sokodeke biography in this article we shall be looking at sokodeke biography .
sokodeke alhaji ibrahim sokodeke was born in the year 1969 , read more malagi biography in this article we shall be looking at malagi biography , family and his net worth .
malagi alhaji idris malagi was read more kantigi biography in this article we shall be looking at kantigi biography , his family and net worth .
liman kantigi biography isah liman read more nupe dictionary this is nupe dictionary compiled by professor ndagi abdullahi amana nupe nupe people have the most richest , beautiful and colourful read more nupe proverbs nupe proverbs author by our own isyaku bala ibrahim .
check table of content .
nupe proverb from the book eganmaganzhi nupe read more nupe food nupe food eyanbici be eni zowa e .
in this article , we shall be discussing the following : food from the book read more nupe film in this article we shall be looking at nupe firm and how it originated .
nupe firm the prime-movers of the read more nupe songs nupe songs .
in this article , we shall be looking at nupe songs and how it originated .
nupe music nupe traditional read more nupe language translation nupe language translation .
fatima muhammad majahidu .
in this article , we shall be discussing the following : learn nupe language we have read more list of nupe names nupe names and it s meaning .
by : ndagi abdullahi amana nupe 08034770801 whatsapp .
below are over 200 nupe names with their read more next page top posts list of tribes in kaduna state nupe language translation assi college of health school fees rolim school of health minna nupe tribe diploma in law in nigeria borden of proof nupe dictionary assi college of health admission requirements how to apply for dubai visa from nigeria categories school 149 law information 61 information 35 american information 28 kenya schools 15 nupe 14 uganda 13 biographies 10 india schools 8 fulani and hausa 8 ghana laws 6 translator 4 usa schools 3 hotels 3 debate 3 kanuri 2 copyright 2026 , all rights reserved home about us terms and conditions privacy policy disclaimer contact us back to top button close search for : close search for
linkedin login , sign in linkedin 0 notifications sign in new to linkedin ?
join now sign in with apple by continuing , you agree to linkedinâ s user agreement , privacy policy , and cookie policy .
or email or phone password forgot password ?
keep me signed in sign in sign in new to linkedin ?
join now sign in with apple by continuing , you agree to linkedinâ s user agreement , privacy policy , and cookie policy .
or email or phone password forgot password ?
keep me signed in sign in user agreement privacy policy community guidelines cookie policy copyright policy send feedback language linkedin corporation â 2026 linkedin corporation â 2026 user agreement privacy policy community guidelines cookie policy copyright policy send feedback language
share on whatsapp features calling messaging groups channels meta ai status security whatsapp plus privacy blog apps help center for business log in download download share on whatsapp nupe proverbs https : coopills . com nupe-proverbs open app don't have the app ?
download it now looks like you don't have whatsapp installed .
download app download download what we do features blog security for business who we are about us careers brand center privacy use whatsapp mobile desktop tablet whatsapp web need help ?
contact us help center apps security advisories download 2026 whatsapp llc terms privacy policy sitemap english select a region all languages 60 africa and the middle east 6 americas 4 asia-pacific 22 eastern europe 17 western europe 14 afrikaans az rbaycan bahasa indonesia català čeština dansk deutsch eesti english español filipino français gaeilge hrvatski italiano kiswahili latviešu lietuvių magyar melayu nederlands norsk bokmål o zbek polski português brasil português portugal română shqip slovenčina slovenščina suomi svenska tiếng việt türkçe
nupe songs menu coopills search for school law information american information biographies search for home nupe nupe songs nupe nupe songs share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram nupe songs .
in this article , we shall be looking at nupe songs and how it originated .
nupe music nupe traditional music is sung by the ningba which means musician s while the enyanicizhi beats the drum .
legendary nupe singers of memory include people like hajiya fatima lolo , alhaji nda asabe , hajiya nnadzwa , hauwa kulu , baba- mini , ahmed shata and e . t . c .
according to ambassador solomon yisa .
music is a medication that purify the heart .
history of nupe music nupe people are generally lively and happy people .
they enjoy entertainment in the form of music .
related articles nupe dictionary nupe proverbs nupe food traditional music with folksongs are prominent features during marriage ceremonies at both the bride s and groom s houses .
it is an occasion where friends and well-wishers come over to dance and spend money to the praise singers as a clear demonstration of love and best wishes .
read also sokodeke biography in the past , women dominate praise singing in bida areas , but men feature prominently in lafiyagi area .
the youths have captured the scene in bida area in recent years with the emergence of nma gongoni and umaru lanle s group , babaminin and ahmed waka groups .
this type of music has been quite sensational and the attractive one to the youths is the angale narrow drum construction that the sets are erected on the flow as angale drums .
however , the foundation of nupe music is rooted in the original eyan dukun pot drum and later gbagurasa bigger drum that can be hung on the shoulder .
read also nupe proverbs the woman who brought nupe music to national and international recognition is late hajiya fatima lolo .
she was a delight to watch and she no doubt brought beauty and glamour into nupe music with her spectacular perfor- mances at various national and international festivals .
some of these include the kaduna durbar and festac 77 .
also the memory of her wonderful outing at the institute of african studies , university of ibadan , still lingers on .
she was succeeded by her supportive lieutenants like hajiya halima bida , hajiya kulu lafiagi , hajiya nnasha emigubagi , hajiya nnasha ewonko , hajiya kulu kuchi , late hajiya nnadzwa egwa and late fatima raba .
the adult men in the trade are ndayisah kusomunu , alhaji sheshi emigubagi and ndanuwa kpandaragi .
read also nupe dressing finally , nupe music has served as a motivator in-group farming in the past , where gbagurasa drum is used to praise men in action at the farm level on competitive execution of farm operations .
in recent years , it has proved to be popular social mobilization tool .
recent experience in hiv aids awareness campaign reveals that nupe angale music is a viable tool for mobilizing people for change in attitude , knowledge and practices this was demonstrated with nma gongoni and umaru lanle s group during an hiv aids entertainment-education experiment in bida emirate .
the result of such effort was mass awareness from 83 . 4 lack of knowledge of hiv aids in pre-intervention assessment in 1998 to 100 awareness and knowledge of the disease in post-intervention assessment in the year 2000 .
yahaya , 2000 .
share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram facebook twitter linkedin pinterest reddit messenger messenger whatsapp telegram share via email nupe language translation nupe film related articles etsu nupe traditional titles in nupe land nupe film list of nupe names nupe language translation nupe dressing leave a reply cancel reply check also close nupe nupe tribe top posts list of tribes in kaduna state nupe language translation assi college of health school fees rolim school of health minna nupe tribe diploma in law in nigeria how to apply for dubai visa from nigeria taraba state university school fees how to create webmoney account in nigeria towns in kwara state categories school 149 law information 61 information 35 american information 28 kenya schools 15 nupe 14 uganda 13 biographies 10 india schools 8 fulani and hausa 8 ghana laws 6 translator 4 usa schools 3 hotels 3 debate 3 kanuri 2 copyright 2026 , all rights reserved home about us terms and conditions privacy policy disclaimer contact us back to top button close search for : close search for
nupe dictionary menu coopills search for school law information american information biographies search for home nupe nupe dictionary nupe nupe dictionary share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram this is nupe dictionary compiled by professor ndagi abdullahi amana nupe nupe people have the most richest , beautiful and colourful culture in the whole africa , in term of their foods enyagicizhi marriage yawojin greetings emisazhi dancing enyanya dressings ewofon respect cinwan facial mark etsa creativity enyatswa .
related articles nupe dictionary nupe proverbs nupe food english-nupe dictionary aadvark , n . , kútsuṇkîṇ .
aadwolf , n . , shìgóntakîṇ .
interj . , aah !
aaron , n . , árúnạ .
aaron s rod , n . , kwǎkwǎgúṇ árúnạ .
aba garment , n . , ábá .
abaca , n . , àbaká .
aback , adv . , zùṇmạloci .
abacus , n . , tápàtàgi ; tákùṇ pàtàgi .
abaddon , n . , kpankonạ ; kpankoro enạ .
abaft , adv . , kézùṇmạ .
abalone , n . , àbùlonìgi .
abampere , n . , abanpéré .
abandon , v . , lugwa .
abandonment , n . , egwalu .
abandonment option , n . , egwalu tsàjiṇ .
abandonment value , n . , kuṇkuṇdạn gwalu .
abase , v . , yàgbà .
abasement , n . , gbàyà .
abash , adj . , v . , wạṇzùṇyě .
abashment , n . , zùṇyěwạṇ .
abate , v . , zúṇ .
abatement , n . , zúṇzúṇ .
abatis , n . , zúṇkîṇkó .
abaxial , n . , zhisankarago .
abaya , n . , abáyà .
abba , n . , ndǎtsóci ; ndǎ tsóci .
abbacy , n . , ndǎtsócibà .
abbasid , n . , abasìci .
abbatial , n . , ndǎtsócibàci .
abbatoir , n . , nạzúṇbà ; enạzúṇbà .
abbe , n . , ndǎntsóci .
abbess , n . , nnǎntsóci .
abbeville , n . , abivili .
abbevillian , n . , abivilici .
abbey , n . , ndǎntsóba .
abbot , n . , bàndǎ ; ebà ndǎ .
abbreviate , v . , pagéré .
abbreviation , n . , gérépa .
abcoulomb , n . , abukúlù .
abdest , n . , yěṇá ; eyěṇá .
abdicate , v . , zhìsátsu ; zhì èsatsu .
abdication , n . , èsátsuzhì .
abdomen , n . , núbwô .
abdominal , adj . , núbwôci .
abdominal breathing , n . , esuṇsúṇ núbwô .
abducens nerve , n . , dìṇkiṇ bònyěgá .
abduct , v . , bònyě .
abductee , n . , eyěbògi .
abduction , n . , eyěbò .
abductor , n . , eyěbòci .
abeam , adv . , zhègwàdwa .
abecederean , n . , ebisídìci .
abed , adv . , ṃàletí .
abel , n . , hábílá .
abele , n . , abélì .
abelia , n . , abélìci .
abelian group , n . , nàmi abélìci .
abelmosk , n . , nṃàzúda .
abenaki , n . , àbìnákì .
abeokuta , n . , àbìyókutá .
aberdeen , n . , ábudìnì .
aberdeen angus , n . , ábudìnì ángusí .
abernethy , n . , àbunétì .
aberrant , n . , záyěkuṇ .
aberration , n . , yězákuṇ .
abet , v . , pagwa .
abetting , n . , egwapa .
abeyance , n . , kaka ; ka èká .
abfarad , n . , abufárù .
abhenry , n . , abuhéri .
abhor , v . , ṇàvǒ .
abhorrence , n . , niṇàvǒ .
abhorrent , n . , niṇàvǒci .
abide , v . , fédạn .
abiding , n . , fifédạn .
abidjan , n . , abíjạṇ .
abietic acid , n . , tsàrìgi tíkàṇcigá .
abigail , n . , abigélì .
abiku spirit child , n . , dzǎṃàgi .
abilene principle , n . , tídzò ábulìnì .
ability , n . , jiṇjiṇwǒ .
ability grouping , n . , nàmi jiṇjiṇwǒ .
ability to pay , n . , jiṇjiṇwǒ ṇyá yiyáwǒ .
ab initio , adv . , càncàbà .
abiogenesis , n . , nàkákânmạ .
abiotic , n . , nànạkuṇ .
abir , n . , abéri .
abitur , n . , wadzùṇcizhì .
abject , adj . , nàkpárá .
abjure , v . , zhìbǒ .
abkhaz , n . , abukázhì .
ablation , n . , lilákiávo .
ablate , vt . , lákiávo .
ablative , n . , lilákiávoci .
ablator , n . , zàlákiábo .
ablaut , n . , wóva ; èwóva .
ablaze , adj . , v . , wạṇnạ .
able , adj . , jiṇwǒ .
able-bodied , adj . , nạkàṇ-jiṇjiṇwǒci .
able rate , n . , milò jiṇjiṇwǒ .
able seaman , n . , ndǎdù jiṇjiṇwǒ .
able-bodied seaman , n . , ndǎdù nạkàṇ-jiṇjiṇwǒci .
abled , adj . , jiṇwǒci .
ableism , n . , jiṇjiṇwǒwogi .
abloom , adj . , gòfiṇnilá .
ablution , n . , yèṇá ; eyěṇá .
ablution , perform , v . , ṇáyě .
ably , adv . , jiṇjiṇwǒnyǐ .
abnegate , v . , ṇàmipa ; ṇà emipa .
abnegation , v . , mipaṇà .
abnormal , adj . , ràzhì ; rà zhìzhì .
abnormality , n . , zhìrà ; ezhìrà .
abnormal loss , n . , gbigbíṇyá ràzhì .
abnormal profit , n . , elé ràzhì .
abnormal retinal correspondence , n . , fùkà sayéci ràzhì .
abnormal returns , n . , ezhǐnzhí ràzhì .
abo , n . , abo .
aboard , adj . , v . , dạnya ; dạn eya .
abode , n . , kpòmi .
abohm , n . , abomù .
aboiteau , n . , lenjèdù ; lenjè edù .
abolish , v . , kòtí .
abolition , n . , etíkò .
abolitionist , n . , etíkòci .
abomasum , n . , nyèděsákuṇnạ .
a-bomb , n . , nạtiṇgi-a .
abominable , adj . , nyạdèdèkóci ; enyạdèdèkóci .
abominable snowman , n . , ndǎnyạfù nyạdèdèkó .
abominate , n . , là nyạdèdèkó .
abomination , n . , nyạdèdèkó ; enyạdèdèkó .
aboral , n . , ṇàmi .
aboriginal , n . , zàciàci .
aboriginality , n . , zànciàzàncià .
aboriginal rights , n . , ebózhì zàciàci .
aborigine , n . , zàcià ; ezà ciàbà .
aborning , adv . , mimạka .
abort fail , v . , feya .
abort pregnancy , v . , zhèwạṇ ; zhèwạṇya .
abortifacient , n . , yěmạtswawạṇzhè .
abortion , n . , wạṇzhè ; ewạṇ zhèya .
abortion doctor , n . , májiṇ wạṇzhè .
abortion pill , n . , páyagi wạṇzhè .
abortion trauma syndrome , n . , cigáṇí tìntáṇ wạṇzhè .
abortionist , n . , wạṇzhèci .
abortive , adj . , wạṇzhègi .
abound , adj . , v . , dǒkuṇkó .
abounding , pres .
part . , ekuṇdǒkó .
about , prep . , tíṇyá ; etí ṇyá .
about , adv . , eba .
about-face , n . , zhèyé-zùṇmà .
about ship , v . , zhèya ; zhè eya .
about-turn , n . , zhèyé-zhèzùṇmà .
above top , prep . , etǐ .
above , n . , gòtí .
aboveboard , adj . , etípàtàkùṇ o .
aboveground , adj . , etíkînbo .
above-mentioned , adj . , tuṇye-etíci .
above-the-fold , adj . , etǐ-kikapa-o .
above-the-line , adj . , etǐ-esùṇ-o .
above-the-title , adj . , etǐ-tíci-o .
ab ovo , adv . , zhìnca ; ezhì cá .
abracadabra , n . , aburakadabura .
abrade , vt . , iv . , gbiáya .
abraham , n . , birama ; ibìráhímạ .
abrasion , n . , gbigbiáya .
abrasive , adj . , gbiáyagi .
abreaction , n . , nạguṇgùnga .
abreast , adv . , ṃàkpánkpá .
abridge , vt . , ṇàgéré .
abridged , adj . , ṇàgérégi .
abroad , adv . , kázhìtí .
abroad , n . , zhìkátí .
abrogate , v . , wugàṇmi .
abrupt , adj . , cekpara .
abruptly , adv . , cekparanyi .
abscess , n . , egún .
abscisic acid , n . , tsàrìgi sùṇbayagi .
abscissa , n . , sùṇbaya ; esùn baya .
abscission , n . , sùṇbayakuṇ .
abscond , v . , dzùṇnạnga .
absconder , n . , nạngadzùṇci .
abseil , v . , ṃàgbạṇ ; ṃà ègbạṇ .
absence , n . , ciciṇbo .
absence seizure , n .
absent , adj . , v . , ṇàbo .
absent-mindedness , n . , tànkokogi .
absinthe , n . , guṇgòrònuwạṇ .
absolute , adj . , kponyí .
absolute advantage , n . , dzoló kponyí .
absolute auction , n , bátú kponyí .
absolute ceiling , n . , dafin kponyí .
absolutely , adv . , kponkponyí .
absolutely not !
interj . , kponyí a !
absolute magnitude , n . , gbángágbà kponyí .
absolute majority , n . , gbógbàci kponyí .
absolute music , n . , toroko kponyí .
absoluteness , n . , kpokponkponyí .
absolute poverty , n . , yàjì kponyí .
absolute priority , n . , kédzògi kponyí .
absolute temperature , n . , kálántsa kponyí .
absolute value , n . , kuṇkuṇdạn kponyí .
absolute zero , n . , vuṇlági kponyí .
absolution , n . , kponyífá .
absolutism , n . , kponyíjiṇ .
absolve , v . , fo .
absolving , n . , fifo .
absonant , n . , zhìwú .
absorb , v . , fíṇmi .
absorb attention , v . , kulisafi ; kulasafi .
absorbance , n . , mifíṇ .
absorbefacient , adj . , dzimifín .
absorbent , n . , fíṇmiyagi .
absorbent cotton , n . , lulu fíṇmiyagi .
absorptance , n . , fíṇmikpa .
absorption , n . , fíṇmiki .
absorption point , n . , tígi fíṇmiki .
absorption spectrum , n . , kina fíṇmiki .
absquatulate , v . , zhiforofo .
abstain , v . , kìṇ .
abstemious , adj . , washizhìci .
abstention , n . , kikégǎṇ .
abstinence , n . , kégǎṇfé .
abstinence theory , n . , dìbì kégǎṇfé .
abstract , v . , lìwa ; lì wa .
abstract , n . , lìwagi .
abstract expressionism , n . , gádágbejin lilìwa .
abstraction , n . , lilìwa .
abstractionism , n . , lilìwajiṇ .
abstract noun , n . , yéci lìwagi .
abstract of title , n . , lìwagi nya tíci .
abstruse , adj . , cesó .
absurd , adj . , kpàmbǎ .
absurdism , n . , kpàmbǎso .
absurdity , n . , kpàmbǎgi .
absurdity , engage in , v . , so kpàmbǎ .
abu dhabi , n . , àbú zábì .
abuilding , adj . , dạnbàmi o .
abuja , n . , ábújá .
abulia , n . , gbàṇwùciṇbo .
abuna , n . , dǎyî ; ndǎ yî .
abundant , adj . , liàshia .
abundantly , adv . , liàshianyǐ .
abundance , n . , shalià ; eshialià .
abuse , v . , nyiyé .
abuse , n . , eyényi .
abuse verbal , v . , gítokó .
abuse verbal , n . , tokógí .
àbú simbel , n . , abu símbèlì .
abusive , n . , tokógíci .
abusive tax shelter , n . , dàta èdǔ tokógíci .
abut , vt , vi , kekîn .
abutment , n . , kînke .
abuttals , n . , kînkezhì .
abuzz , n . , ṃàwúle .
abvolt , n . , vólútìkpó .
abwatt , n . , wótìkpó .
abysmal , adj . , gushekókó .
abyss , n . , bókûn .
abyssal , adj . , tàkòdù ; tàkò edù .
abyssal plain , n . , làgǎṇ tàkòdù .
abyssinia , n . , hábàshà ; àbìsínínyạ .
abyssinian , n . , hábàshàci .
abyssinian cat , n . , dàngi hábàshàci .
abyssopelagic , adj . , tàkòdùkóci .
acacia , n . , káshía .
academe , n . , ewǔbàgi ; wǔbàgi .
academia , n . , ewǔbà ; wǔbà .
academic , n . , ewǔtaci ; wǔtaci .
academic dress , n . , èdě wǔtaci .
academician , n . , zàwǔtaci .
academism , n . , wǔtacijin .
academic year , n . , eya wǔtaci .
academy , n . , ewǔta ; wǔta .
academy award , n . , tuṇkiṇ wǔta .
acadia , n . , àkádiyá .
acadian , n . , àkádiyáci .
acadian french , n . , firenci àkádiyá .
acadian orogeny , n . , kânmạnpati àkádiyá .
acalculia , n . , zhìlòkebá .
acanthi , n . , fiṇnikànzhì .
acanthocephalan , n . , gókàṇtí ; egókàṇtí .
acanthomoeba , n . , kànwazhìngi .
acanthomoeba infection , n . , kukuká kànwazhìngi .
acantopterygian , n . , gwakaṇkaṇ .
acanthus , n . , fiṇnikàṇ .
a cappella , adv . , bé béré ni .
acapulco , n . , àkápulikò .
acardia , n . , kòvigizhì .
acariasis , n . , mukumitáṇ .
acari , n . , mukumizhì .
acaricide , n . , mukumiwugi .
acarid , n . , mukumigi .
acaroid resin , n . , cìṇbuṇnú mukugi .
acarology , n . , kpikpémukumi .
acarophobia , n . , dàṇsuṇkómukumi .
acarus , n . , mukumi .
acatalectic , adj . , kagingi .
acaudal , adj . , cintàràciṇboci .
acaulescent , adj . , gbòkòciṇboci .
acca , n . , zàwǔ .
accede , v . , yé .
accelerando , adv . , adj . , kpalanci .
accelerant , adj . , kpalagi .
accelerate , v . , lakpa .
accelerated benefits , n . , miṃàgezhi kpala .
accelerated cost recovery system , n . , mikugúṇ dzìdzìzhǐṇ wófà kpala .
accelerated depreciation , n . , wócíṇ kpala .
read also nupe tribe accelerated graphics port , n . , yònyǐká kpàtazún kpala .
acceleration , n . , ekpala .
acceleration clause , n . , mizogi kpala .
acceleration coefficient , n . , gídzàgebà kpala .
acceleration request , n . , gwabà kpala .
acceleration stress , n . , bapà kpala .
accelerator , n . , kpalaci .
accelerator card , n . , vòkpalú kpala .
accelerometer , n . , dǎmugikpala .
accent , n . , dìmi ; edì mi .
accent lighting , n . , bàtiṇgi dìmi .
accented , adj . , bamdìmi .
accentual , adj . , nyidìmi .
accentuate , v . , ròdìmi .
accept , v . , gò ; gòyé .
acceptable , adj . , yégòci .
acceptable daily intake , n . , gínyi fondodò yégòci .
acceptance , n . , yégò .
acceptance agent , n . , zàtun yégò .
acceptance bonus , n . , wǎngigi yégò .
acceptance sampling , n . , màmakicigi yégò .
acceptation , n . , yiyégò .
accepter , n . , yégòci .
accepting , n . , gugòyé .
accepting house , n . , emì gugòyé .
acceptor , n . , zayégòci .
access , v . , gàkpa ; gà ekpa .
access , n . , ekpagà .
access broker , n . , shìkwatia kpagà .
access charge , n . , wókàrà kpagà .
access code , n . , fínmi kpagà .
access control , n . , shikàngi kpagà .
accessory , n . , nyạgwabe ; enyạ egwa be .
accessory criminal abetter , n . , zàgwapa .
accessory after the fact , n . , zàgwapa zunma gànjiṇ o .
accessory apartment , n . , katakányí nyạgwabe .
accessory before the fact , n . , zàgwapa bedzo gànjiṇ o .
accessory mineral , n . , kùjá nyạgwabe .
accessory nerve , n . , dìṇkiṇ nyạgwabe .
accessory pigment , n . , ètạngi nyạgwabe .
accessory shoe , n . , èdà nyạgwabe .
accessible , adj . , kpagàyéci .
accession , n . , kpagàyé .
accession country , n . , kinkpò kpagàyé .
access number , n . , dókuṇgi kpagà .
access point , n . , tígi kpagà .
access profile , n . , furusàngi kpagà .
access time , n . , èká kpagà .
access url , n . , url i kpagà .
acciaccatura , n . , níbíngi ; ení ebíngi .
accidence , n . , titánkîn .
accident , n . , kîntán .
accidental , adj . , kîntánci .
accidental death , n . , tsutsu kîntán .
accidental death and dismemberment , n . , tsutsu kîntán be bàgúṇnyi .
accident and emergency , n . , kîntán be dzùṇdzùṇběgà e .
accident insurance , n . , nyạgbànbá kîntán .
accident-prone , bambókîntán .
accipiter , n . , lányé .
accipitrine , adj . , lányéci .
acclaim , v . , doyé .
acclaim , n . , yédo .
acclamation , n . , dudoyé .
acclimate , v , jinkátíkîn .
acclimatize , v . , mạkátíkîn .
acclivity , n . , tíguṇ .
accolade , n . , cíṇwạnkó .
accommodate , v . , gòmìdạn .
accomodating , n . , mìgòdạnci .
accomodation , n . , mìgòdạn ; èmìgòdạn .
accomodation address , n . , bàfé mìgòdạn .
accomodation bill , n . , guṇtèka mìgòdạn .
accomodation ladder , n . , ekpa mìgòdạn .
accomodation paper , n . , bàrifù mìgòdạn .
accomodation platform , n . , siṇsàrà mìgòdạn .
accomodationist , n . , zamìgòdạnci .
accompaniment , n . , kạnạzhe .
accompanist , n . , kạnạzheci .
accompany , v . , yi ; yizàn .
accomplice , n . , èmànginci .
accomplish , v . , gǔṇyé .
accomplished , adj . , yégǔnci .
accomplished bill of lading , n . , dòkpo guṇtèka jinshéci .
accomplishment , n . , yégǔn .
accord , v . , yéyé .
accord , n . , eyéyé .
accordance , n . , yéyéga .
according as , conj . , yéyé ke .
accordingly , adv . , yéyé acinga .
according to , prep . , yéyé gàn .
accordion , n . , nạmfatò ; nạmfa ètò .
accordion fold , n . , kikápà nạmfatò .
accordion insert , n . , básogi nạmfatò .
accordion pleats , n . , yífígi nạmfatò .
accost , v . , gbwàwùn .
accouchment , n . , kávimạn ; èká evimạn .
accoucher , n . , zàvimạn .
account finance , v . , dạndǔ ; dạn èdǔ .
account , n . , dǔdạngi ; èdǔdạngi .
accountable , adj . , tádǔwǒ ; tá èdǔwǒ .
accountancy , n . , tuṇdǔdạn ; etuṇ èdǔdạn .
accountant , n . , èdǔdạnci .
accountant s letter , n . , báritsaká èdǔdạnci .
account day , n . , efo èdǔdạn .
account debtor , n . , gbàtàgíci èdǔdạn .
account executive , n . , zàmigbatú èdǔdạn .
account for , vt . , gàn dǔdạn .
accounting , n . , èdǔdạn .
accounting cost , n . , wófà èdǔdạn .
accounting cycle , n . , kurumạgi èdǔdạn .
accounting equation , n . , elózhègi èdǔdạn .
accounting exposure , n . , kpalawǔ èdǔdạn .
accounting insolvency , n . , wósạnnà èdǔdạn .
accounting profit , n . , èlè èdǔdạn .
accounting rate of return , n . , milò èzhǐn nyạ èdǔdạn .
accounting ratio , n . , tòntòrí èdǔdạn .
accounting year , n . , eya èdǔdạn .
account of sales , n . , èdǔdạn nya nyạkúnzhi .
accounts payable , n . , èdǔdạnzhi yiyàwǒci .
accounts receivable , n . , èdǔdạnzhi gbwàgòwǒci .
accounts receivable aging , n . , ekùku gbwàgòwǒci èdǔdạnzhi .
accounts receivable factoring , n . , gbàtàshi gbwàgòwǒci èdǔdạnzhi .
accounts receivable financing , n . , gigewó gbwàgòwǒci èdǔdạnzhi .
accounts receivable turnover , n . , zhizhèkpe gbwàgòwǒci èdǔdạnzhi .
accouter , v . , gunwifạn ; gun àwifạn .
accouterment , n . , àwifạn .
accra , n . , akárá .
accredited land consultant , n . , dạndàci kîn jìbàgíci .
accrete , v . , sábàn .
accreted , adj . , bànsáci .
accreted value , n . , kuṇkuṇdạn bànsáci .
accretion , n . , bànsá ; ebànsá .
accretion disk , n . , fefe bànsá .
accrual , n . , gbwásági .
accrual basis , n . , kînshì gbwásági .
accrual bond , n . , rǐgbà gbwásági .
accrual method , n . , kpatuṇ gbwásági .
accrual of discount , n . , gbwásági nya wódíṇ .
accrue , v . , ságbwá .
accrued expense , n . , wómán gbwásáci .
accrued income , n . , wèzhǐṇ gbwásáci .
accrued interest , n . , shiàshià gbwásáci .
accrued market discount , n . , wódíṇ dzukó gbwásáci .
acculturate , v . , gindidạn .
acculturation , didạngin .
accumulate , v . , dànyekan .
accumulated dividend , n . , gigáṇri didànyekàṇci .
accumulated earning , n . , wógbe didànyekàṇci .
accumulation , n . , didànyekàṇ .
accumulation period , n . , roro didànyekàṇ .
accumulation unit , n . , nníkạn didànyekàṇ .
accumulative , adj . , didànyekàṇgi .
accumulator , n . , ndadànyekàṇgi ; ndadidànyekàṇgi .
accuracy , n . , èkíari .
accuracy jumping , n . , jijamfùrù èkíari .
accurate , adj . , kíanyí .
accurately , adv . , kíankíanyí .
accursed , adj . , nyạmibóci .
accusation , n . , ebódatú .
accusative , adj . , bódatúgi .
accusatorial , adj . , bódatúgà .
accusatory , n . , bódatúgàri .
accuse , v . , dabótú .
accused , n . , bódatúci .
accuser , n . , zàbódaci .
accusing , n . , bódaci .
accustom , vt . , páyé .
accustomed , adj . , páyéci .
ace , n . , túnnígi ; etú niní .
acebutolol , n . , míkònìsábá .
acellular , n . , kiáwuṇcinboci .
acentric , adj . , ràtàciṇ .
acepahlous , adj . , ràtí .
acequia , n . , jèyé .
acequia madre , n . , jèyé nnǎkuṇ .
acer , n . , acerb , adj . , wukù .
acerbate , v . , gíkùwu .
acerbation , n . , kùwugí .
acerbic , adj . , wukùgi .
acerbity , n . , ekùwu .
acervulus , n . , kìtìrì .
acet- , prefix , yìsábá .
acetabulum , n . , kùṇkodo ; tsúkùṇkodo .
acetal , n . , yìsábáge ; yìsábági ege .
acetaldehyde , n . , geràsábá ; geràmạnu yìsábá .
acetamide , n . , sạnmạriyìsábá .
acetaminophen , n . , geyésạnmạgà yìsábá .
acetanilide , n . , zhìshígiciyìsábári .
acetate , n . , yìsábákùn .
acetazolamide , n . , sạnmạrizhìsuṇyìsábá .
acetic , adj . , yìsábági .
acetic acid , n . , tsárigi yìsábági .
acetic anhydride , n . , ràmạnuwạnri yìsábági .
acetify , v . , sàyìsábági .
aceto- , prefix , yìsábá .
acetohexamide , n . , sạnmạritágùṇci yìsábá .
acetone , n . , yìsábányạ .
acetone body , n . , kámàṇ yìsábányạ .
acetyl , n . , yìsábári .
acetyl coezyme a , n . , nímbǒbà a yìsábári .
acetylate , v . , bayìsábá acetylcholine , n . , gàrigiyìsábári .
acetylcholinesterase , n . , gàrigiyìsábárikòci .
acetylene , n . , yìsábági .
acetylide , n . , yìsábágici .
acey-deucy , n . , túnnígi bàgǐgi .
interj . , nhún !
ach , n . , é si ecì .
acha , n . , suru .
achaea , n . , akáyíyà .
achaean , n . , akáyíyàci .
achaemenid , n . , akáménici .
achalasia , n . , ràfávùn .
achar , n . , aká .
acharya , n . , akáriyá .
interj . , úhǔn !
ache body , v . , tán .
ache head , v . , sáṇ .
achene , n . , ràkpégi .
acheron , n . , akironi .
acheulian , n . , ashulici .
a cheval , adv . , ebanba .
achieve , v . , tsatí ; tsa etí .
achieved status , n . , kiṇnigíró títsaci .
achievement , n . , títsa ; etítsa .
achievement age , n . , yatí títsa .
achiever , n . , zàtítsa .
achilles , n . , akilìsì .
achilles heel , n . , bòkùn akilìsì .
achilles jerk , n . , fùrùkpà akilìsì .
achilles tendon , n . , borogo akilìsì .
aching body , n . , titán .
aching head , n . , sisán .
achiral , adj . , ràgwaci .
achkan , n . , akâni .
achlorhydria , n . , ràgónumạnu .
achondrite , n . , ràkpórogi .
achondroplasia , n . , ràkizhì .
achromat , n . , ràyénuci .
achromatic , adj . , ràyénu .
achromatic colour , n . , nutsa ràyénu .
achromatic lens , n . , lówòci ràyénu .
achromatic prism , n . , èdìngi ràyénu .
achromatopsia , n . , ràleyénu .
acicular , n . , kiṇgi .
acid , n . , tìgì .
acidaemia , n . , gìatìgì .
acid anhydride , n . , ràmạnuwạnri tìgì .
acid chloride , n . , gónugici tìgì .
acid deposition , n . , cíṇcíṇta tìgì .
acid drop , n . , etò tìgì .
acidemia , n . , gìatìgì .
acid grind , n . , ego tìgì .
acid house , n . , èmì tìgì .
acidic , adj . , gìtì .
acidify , v . , bátìgì .
acidimetre , n . , dǎmutìgì .
acidity , n . , gìtìgìtì .
acid jazz , n . , jazì tìgì .
acidophil , n . , adj . , bamgìtì .
acidophilic , adj . , bamgìtì .
acidophilus , n . , bamgìtì .
acidophilus milk , n . , nwánwá bamgìtì .
acidosis , n . , gbàntìgì .
acid protease , n . , dzòngikòci tìgì .
acid rain , n . , ele tìgì .
acid reflux , n . , jèzhìnró tìgì .
acid rock , n . , tákùṇkó tìgì .
acid salt , n . , esaṇ tìgì .
acid test , n . , mimàciṇlě tìgì .
acid test ration , n . , tòntòrí mimàciṇlě tìgì .
acidulate , v . , fiátìgì .
acidulous , adj . , tìgìfiági .
aciduria , n . , vìdìnnìtìgì .
acierate , v . , leléfà .
acinus , n . , kposun .
ack ack , n . , ákù àkù .
ack-emma , n . , àkù emaṇ .
ackee apple , n . , yìlà .
ackee apple tree , n . , yìlànci .
ackerman steering , n . , tsótsógi àkùmaṇ .
acknowledge , v . , yèkpikpe .
acknowledgement , n . , kpikpeyè .
aclinic line , n . , esùn ràtsòkpé .
aclu , n . , aclu .
acme , n . , lègè .
acmeism , n . , lègèjiṇ .
acne , n . , gízògi .
acne conglobata , n . , gízògi tíkaṇko .
acne rosacea , n . , gízògi korodzûndzûn .
acne vulgaris , n . , gízògi dacigi .
read also traditional titles in nupe land acoelomate , n . , ràfogbàṇ .
acolyte , n . , kpanyági .
aconcagua , n . , àkonkágùwà .
aconite , n . , naṇcé .
aconitine , n . , naṇcégi .
acorn , n . , yénsùn .
acorn barnacle , n . , kandùsaṇ yénsùn .
acorn squash , n . , èbě yénsùn .
acorn worm , n . , ègo yénsùn .
acouchi , n . , àkúshì .
acoustic , adj . , guṇwo ; eguṇwo ; eguṇ wo .
acoustic nerve , n . , dìṇkiṇ guṇwo .
acoustic neuroma , n . , dìṇkiṇgiwùṇ guṇwo .
acoustic roll , n . , nyàtsaṇ guṇwo .
acoustics , n . , guṇwozhi .
acoustic tile , n . , giamạ guṇwo .
acoustic trauma , n . , tìntán guṇwo .
acoustoelectric , n . , nạdìṇdorógiguṇwo .
acquaint , vt . , nyakà .
acquaintance , n . , nugùndò .
acquaitance rape , n . , shiankálá zàkáṇ .
acquainting , n . , ekànya .
acquiesce , v . , fáyé .
acquire , v . , bó .
acquired advantage , n . , edzoló gígòci .
acquired character , n . , yèrébó gígòci .
acquired endowment , n . , riagí gígòci .
acquired immune deficiency syndrome , n . , cigáṇí díṇdíṇké zhìtuṇró gígòci .
acquired taste , n . , sàṇwo gigígò .
acquirement , n . , gigígò .
acquirer , n . , zagígòci .
acquisition , n . , gògògí .
acquisition account , n . , dǔdạngi gògògí .
acquisition cost , n . , wófà gògògí .
acquisition mailing , n . , fúfùgí gògògí .
acquisitions , n . , gògògízhì .
acquisition stock , n . , kìtì gògògí .
acquisitive , adj . , gògògíci .
acquit , v . , foyé .
acquittal , n . , yéfo .
acquittance , n . , gbàtàfo .
acrania , n . , ràtívo .
acre , n . , kânpá .
acreage , n . , kânpági .
acredit , v . , gíjìbà .
acreditation , n . , jìbàgí .
acredited , adj . , jìbàgíci .
acredited investor , n . , zawúfạn jìbàgíci .
acre-foot , n . , bìcíkpere kânpá .
acre-inch , n . , eními kânpá .
acrid , adj . , tsàró .
acridine , n . , tsàrógi .
acriflavine , n . , yaràntsàró .
acrimonious , adj . , bibátsàri .
acrimony , n . , bátsàri .
acrivastine , n . , mitsàróga .
acro- , prefix , -kpáká .
acrobat , n . , kìtìtsàci .
acrobatics , n . , kìtìtsà .
acrocentric , adj . , tàcìṇkpáká .
acrocephaly , n . , etíkpáká .
acrodont , n . , nyíkànkpáká .
acrodynia , n . , etáṇkpáká .
acrolect , n . , edǐkpáká .
acrolein , n . , mitsàroó .
acrolith , n . , tákùnkpáká .
acrocyanosis , n . , dòfakákpáká .
across , adv . , dankpan ; dankpan dozhi o .
acrylic , n . , adj . , mitsàrógi .
acrylic acid , n . , tsàrìgi mitsàrógi .
acrylic resin , n . , cìṇbuṇnú mitsàrógi .
act , v . , jiṇgàn .
act , n . , egànjiṇ .
actaeon , n . , akitényiṇ .
actin , n . , jiṇgiṇ .
actin- , prefix , jiṇgiṇ .
actinal , adj . , nạyèrènạ .
acting temporary , adj . , gòsuṇgwa .
actinian , n . , shinạyèrè .
actinic , adj . , nạyèrèkàn .
actinide , n . , lesónạyèrè .
actino- , prefix , -nạyèrèmi .
actinolite , n . , tákùnnạyèrè .
actinometre , n . , dǎmuginạyèrè .
actinomorphic , n . , miyénạyèrè .
actinomycete , n . , kurunạyèrè .
actinomycin , n . , kuruginạyèrè .
actinomycosis , n . , kurutánnạyèrè .
actinopterygian , n . , gwankạnnạyèrè .
actinouranium , n . , kófìṇginạyèrè .
action , n . , jiṇjiṇgàn .
action figure , n . , yétsa jiṇjiṇgàn .
action game , n . , kìtǐdzǒ jiṇjiṇgàn .
action group , n . , nàmi jiṇjiṇgàn .
action item , n . , nyạkàn jiṇjiṇgàn .
action man , n . , ndǎ jiṇjiṇgàn .
action movie , n . , kiánkiági jiṇjiṇgàn .
action officer , n . , zàtuṇbà jiṇjiṇgàn .
action-packed , adj . , jiṇjiṇgàn èkpopaci .
action painting , n . , karo jiṇjiṇgàn .
action potential , n . , kpówǒgi jiṇjiṇgàn .
action replay , n . , edzǒmàbe jiṇjiṇgàn .
action spectrum , n . , bósàṇ jiṇjiṇgàn .
action stations , n . , kiṇnigíbàzhì jiṇjiṇgàn .
action to quiet title , n . , jiṇjiṇgàn nạ a ga koti tici na .
actionable , adj . , jiṇjiṇgànwǒ .
actioner , n . , jiṇjiṇgànci .
activate , v . , nạjiṇgàn .
active , adj . , bá .
activeness , n . , bibá .
activity , n . , bibákàn .
act of contrition , n . , egànjiṇ nyá nînzùṇ .
act of faith , n . , egànjiṇ nyá yiyakpe .
act of god , n . , egànjiṇ nyá sòkó .
act of union , n . , egànjiṇ nyá migúṇkàn .
act on , v . , jiṇgàn etí .
actor , n . , zàjiṇgàn .
act out , v . , jiṇgàn bàde .
actual , adj . , gbohín .
act up , v . , jiṇgàn èpe .
acute angle , n . , kukun .
adage , n . , gàncìṇ .
adam , n . , àdàmǔ .
adam s apple , n . , èkògi .
adapt , v . , dayénu .
adaptation , n . , yénuda .
add , v . , be .
adder , n . , evàn .
addition , n . , bibe .
additive , n . , kando .
address , n . , bàfé ; ebà èdùṇfé .
add up , v . , be kebá .
adenoids , n . , kódàngi .
a deux , adv . , adj . , gúbángi .
adhere , v . , teba .
adhesive , n . , tekangi .
adhesive , adj . , tekàn .
adhesiveness , n . , èkànte .
adieu , interj . , sáyí kándoci .
adjacent , adj . , kumì .
adjoin , v . , kú .
adjoining , n . , kukú .
adjourn , v .
adjournment , n . , tuntítantí .
adjust , v . , yétsò ; yé tsòba .
adjustment , n . , tsutsòyé .
admiral , n . , sakógan ; nusakógan .
admit , v . , gómi admittance , n . , emigó .
admix , v . , vuṇdan .
admixture , n . , vuṇvuṇdan .
admonish , v . , jiṇ gàngbà .
admonition , n . , gàngbà .
adnexa , n . , bàsogi .
adolescence , n . , ènà .
adolescent , n . , nànà .
adopt , v . , te .
adoption , n . , egite .
adorn , v . , shia ; jin shiafurudi .
adornment , n . , shishia ; shiafùrùdi .
adrenal , n . , korikori .
adrift , v . , yalò .
adult , n . , nugba .
adult , adj . , gbáṇgbǎṇ .
adulterer , n . , nyàciṇdáci .
adultery , n . , nyàciṇdá .
adultery , commit , v . , dányàciṇ .
advance , v . , adj . , tatú .
advancement , n . , ètúta ; túta .
advantage , n . , dzoló ; edzoló .
advantageous , adj . , lodzó .
adventure , n . , zhiacinbe .
adventurous , adj . , zhiacinbegi .
advertise , v . , kpòruwó .
advertisement , n . , ruwókpò .
advice , n . , gìṇ .
advise , v . , gigìṇ .
adviser , n . , kàshí .
adze , n . , kékérégi .
aeon , n . , roro .
aegis , n . , saban .
aerial , adj . , tsátsárá .
aerolite , n . , sòkógbà .
aeroplane , n . , yafìtí ; eya fìtí .
afar , adv . , kpákó .
affair event , n . , ènyàn .
affair concern , n . , ebo .
affect , v . , tạn .
affecting emotional , adj . , béshi .
affection , n . , èyě .
affluent , adj . , nyadeci ; enyadeci .
affluent river , n . , dogi ; edogi .
affluence , n . , enyade .
afoot , v . , dàbìcí .
afore , adv . , pányi lě .
a fortiori , adv . , be kágbó gan e afraid , v . , suṇdàṇ .
africa , n . , afirikà .
african person , n . , afirikàci .
african american , n . , afirikàcǐ amerikàci .
african lung fish , n . , edangi .
african knife fish , n . , bantala .
aft , n . , yazùṇ ; eyazùṇ .
after , prep . , zùṇmà .
after-birth , n . , eló .
after this , prep . , beci .
afternoon , n . , yidá ; eyidá .
afterward , adv . , zùṇmà wǔṇcìṇ o .
again , adv . , be .
against , prep . , sún .
agama , n . , katànkpiṇni .
agate , n . , bátakó .
agbada , n . , èwò bùrà .
age years old , n . , eyatí ; yatí .
age era , n . , kámikó .
age become elderly , v . , jiṇ nusa .
age become old , v . , kukù .
aged , adj . , jìgbáṇ .
agency , n . , zàtunta .
agent , n . , zàtun ; ezà tunci .
age-old , adj . , jiṇfo .
aggregate , adj . , furanyi .
aggregate , n . , furagi .
agile , adj . , nyǐdìn .
agility , n . , èdìnyǐ .
aging , n . , ekùku .
agitate , v . , kpèké .
agitated , adj . , kpèjì .
agitation , n . , kpèkékpèké .
agitato , adj . , adv . , kpèkékùnyi .
agitator , n . , kpèkéci .
agitprop , n . , sákpákpèké .
aglaia , n . , àgùláyà .
agleam , adj . , gònạmáṇ .
aglet , n . , kùnkìn ; tákùnkìngi .
agley , adj . , zhìyè .
aglimmer , adj . , gònạkéngǐ .
aglitter , adj . , gònạbáṇ .
agloo , n . , fonyikạ ; èfo nyikạ .
aglow , adj . , gònạko .
aglu , n . , fonyikạ .
agma , n . , túkùnkàn .
agnail , n . , vùdùṇnútáṇ .
agnate , n . , yémạ .
agnathan , n . , ràngbakun .
agnathia , n . , ràngbakungùṇ .
agni , n . , sònàṇ ; àgunì .
agnolotti , n . , èkálì .
agnomen , n . , yenici .
agnosia , n . , ràgbáṇro .
agnostic , n . , ràgbáṇkpeci .
agnosticism , n . , ràgbáṇkpejiṇ .
agnus castus , n . , cigbàṇ tsátsà .
agnus dei , n . , nạngi sòkó .
ago , adv . , lělè .
agog , adj . , womáṇro .
-agog , suffix , mishìgi- agogic , adj . , mishìgùn .
agogics , n . , mishìkàn .
a gogo , adv . , kpo bodo .
-agogue , suffix , mishìgi- agonise , v . , táṇgbáṇ .
agonised , adj . , gbáṇtáṇgạ .
agonising , adj . , táṇgbáṇgạ .
agonist , adj . , gbáṇtáṇci .
agonistic , adj . , gbáṇtáṇkùn .
agony , n . , gbáṇtáṇ .
agony aunt , n . , nnặgi gbáṇtáṇ .
agony column , n . , èkpó gbáṇtáṇ .
agony uncle , n . , ndǎgi gbáṇtáṇ .
agora greek , n . , kàṇyedạ .
agora israeli , n . , wógi .
agorae , n . , kàṇyedạ .
agoraphobia , n . , dàṇwǒgạkàṇyedạ .
agorot , n . , wógi .
agouti , n . , agúti .
agra , n . , agúra .
agrahayana , n . , agúráhayánạ .
agranulocyte , n . , kiáwuṇzhikpórogi .
agrapha , n . , zhìkikáci .
agraphia , n . , zhìnyạká .
agrarian , n . , kânnùkùn .
agrarianism , n . , kânnùkùnjiṇ .
agree , v . , yé ; yégbáṇ .
agreeable person , n . , ezàyèkò .
agreement , n . , egbányé .
agreement of sale , n . , egbányé nyạ nyạkún .
agrestal , n . , kúlatí .
agrestic , n . , kúlatíci .
agri- , prefix , kânrí .
agribusiness , n . , bùcájiṇkânró .
agrichemical , n . , nyạsạgikânrí .
agricultural , adj . , kânnùgi .
agriculture , n . , kânnù .
agriculturist , n . , kânnùci .
agri-food , n . , nyạgícikânrí .
agrimony , n . , túrikạ .
agriterrorism , n . , eyédzújiṇkânrí .
agro- , prefix , kânró .
agrobiology , n . , kpikenạkânró .
agrochemical , n . , nyạsạgikânró .
agrodolce , n . , bákámạnạ .
agrofestry , n . , kúsòkùnkânró .
agroindustrial , adj . , bájiṇtuṇcikânró .
agroindustry , n . , bájiṇtuṇkânró .
agrology , n . , kpikpekânró .
agronomic , adj . , kpikpekîṇgạ .
agronomics , n . , wóyékpakânró .
agronomy , n . , kîṇgạn .
agrostology , n . , kpikpegó .
aground , adj . , adv . , kotú .
agua fresco , n . , nuwaṇdáfègi .
aguardiente , n . , nuwaṇnạgi .
ague , n . , bàgùṇ .
interj . , áh !
interj . , àhá !
ahead , adj . , adv . , dạyé o .
interj . , nhúṇ .
ahimsa , n . , ràgùṇ .
ahistory , adj . , zhìtàṇ .
ahold , n . , gwasuṇkạn .
aholehole , n . , gwankạnkạn .
-aholic , suffix , shigi- a-horizon , n . , nugúṇfìṇ-a .
interj ! , àháya !
ahriman , n . , nạgbạṇ gàgùṇ ; árimạn .
ahura mazda , n . , tsòci lùkóntágbạṇci .
aid , v . , cewú .
aid , n . , ewúce .
aid agency , n . , zàtunta ewúce .
aid climbing , n . , guṇguṇ ewúce .
aide , n . , egi kata .
aided , adj . , wúceci .
aide-de-camp , n . , egi kata-nyạ-dòta .
aided recall , n . , ebótuṇyé wúceci .
read also kantigi biography aid elimination , n . , etíwu ewúce .
aide-memoire , n . , egbàṇpa ewúce .
aid ladder , n . , ekpa ewúce .
aid rating , n . , milògùṇ ewúce .
aids , n . , kékúṇtáṇ .
aids dementia , n . , rànyạgbạn kékúṇtáṇ .
aids dementia complex , n . , yéguṇ rànyạgbạn kékúṇtáṇ .
aids enteropathy , n . , nạtáṇnîndzù kékúṇáṇ .
aids wasting syndrome , n . , cigáṇí zuzoya kékúṇtáṇ .
aid station , n . , kiṇnigíbà ewúce .
aid worker , n . , etuṇloci ewúce .
aigrette , n . , lúnbǒkùṇgi .
aiguille , n . , tákùnkìn .
aiguillette , n . , tákùnkìngi .
aikido , n . , nạgbạṇwàgạní ; àyìkídò .
ail , v . , guṇgùṇ .
ailanthus , n . , cigbạnsòkófìṇ .
aileron , n . , gwapàgi .
ailing , adj . , gùṇguṇci .
ailment , n . , egùṇguṇ .
ailurophile , n . , dàngiwáci .
ailurophobe , n . , dàṇwǒcidàngi .
aim , v . , túgwa .
aim , n . , gwatú ; egwatú .
aimless , adj . , zhìgwatú .
ainhum , n . , tìkpàtiṇ .
ainu , n . , àyínù .
aioli , n . , lowomí .
air , n . , efè .
air , v . , túfè .
airable , adj . , fètáwǒci .
air bag , n . , nạmbàfè .
air bag injury , n . , ebànyi nạmbàfè .
air ball , n . , suṇgǐfè ; esuṇgǐfè .
air base , n . , biyétafè .
air bed , n . , letífè .
air bladder , n . , mìvìdìnnìfè .
airboat , n . , eya nuwạṇfè .
air box , n . , bátafè .
airborne , adj . , dạnfè .
air brake , n . , zàṇkàṇgifè .
airbrick , n . , lànkpàfè .
air bridge , n . , kpandarafè .
airbrush , n . , èfìṇgifè .
airburst , n . , èlàfè .
airbus , n . , kukàṇmạfè .
air cargo agent , n . , zàtun kàràkofè .
air chamber , n . , katandǎfè .
air check , n . , pàyéciṇlěfè .
air chief marshal , n . , bǎdòkò dzoguṇfè .
air cleaning box , n . , kpàti edzútáfè .
air commodore , n . , gàṇpàgifè .
air-condition , vt . , edzúféfè .
air conditioner , n . , edzúfégifè .
air conditioning , n . , edzúféjiṇfè .
aircon unit , n . , nníkạn edúfè .
air-cool , vt . , dáfèfè .
air cooler , n . , fèdàgifè .
air corps , n . , nạbàgifè .
air corridor , n . , dênpàfè .
air cover , n . , kperèfè .
aircraft , n . , nyạtswagifìṇ .
aircraft carrier , n . , nyạláci nyạtswagifìṇ .
aircraftman , n . , ndǎnyạtswagifìṇ .
aircraftwoman , n . , nnǎnyạtswagifìṇ .
aircrew , n . , samàṇfìṇ .
air curtain , n . , děyékàṇfè .
air cushion , n . , fùtùgifè .
air cushion vehicle , n . , kiálági fùtùgifè .
air dam , n . , ègàkófè .
airdate , n . , fokùṇfè .
air display , n . , dêwúfè .
air division , n . , ègáṇfè .
air door , n . , kpàkofè .
airdrome , n . , cibidàfìṇ .
airdrop , n . , cíṇkùṇfìṇ .
air-dry , n . , túyifè .
airedale , n . , éyadàyilì .
airer , n . , efètúci .
air embolism , n . , sobábìfè .
air exchanger , n . , gwasàṇcifè .
airfare , n . , zàṇlèfìṇ .
airfield , n . , kânfìṇ ; kân nya èfìṇ .
airflow , n . , èjèfè .
airflown , adj . , fufùfìṇci .
airfoil , n . , fénifè .
air force , n . , ebapàfè .
air force one , n . , niní ebapàfè .
airframe , n . , ròkòfìṇ .
airfreight , n . , kàràdàgifìṇ .
air gas , n . , fèvuṇfè .
airglow , n . , nạkófè .
airhead , n . , etífìṇ .
air guitar , n . , gìtáfè .
air gun , n . , nạtsofè .
air hockey , n . , gòròkùṇfè .
air hole , n . , èfofè .
air hostess , n . , gagòyíwófìṇ .
airily , adv . , fèginyi .
airing , n . , fètú .
airing cupboard , n . , pàtàkùṇmạndù fètú .
air intake , n . , gínyifè .
airish , adj . , fufè .
air jacket , n . , ewògifè .
air-kiss , n . , miyéfè .
air lane , n . , darafè .
air layering , n . , kukókpefè .
airless , adj . , ràfè .
air letter , n . , báritsakáfè .
airlift , n . , èfìṇdzúfìṇ .
airline , n . , esùnfìṇ .
airliner , n . , esùnfìṇci .
airlock , n . , fifidạnfè .
airmail , n . , fúfùfìṇ .
airman , n . , ndǎfìṇ .
airman basic , n . , biyékun ezàfìṇ .
airman first class , n . , kàmàṇkùṇ kpátí ezàfìṇ .
air marshal , n . , bǎdòkòfìṇ .
air mass , n . , mạmạfè .
air master , n . , ndǎbáfìṇ .
air medal , n . , kpàndzànàfìṇ .
air mile , n . , kpózàṇfè .
air miles , n . , kpózàṇzhifè .
airmobile , n . , gàkéfè .
air officer , n . , zàtuṇbàfìṇ .
airpack , n . , èkpofè .
airpark , n . , gamạnfìṇ .
airperson , n . , ezàfìṇ .
air pistol , n . , àkùtiàgifè .
airplane , n . , pàlàgifìṇ .
air plant , n . , sáṇṇáfè .
airplay , n . , dzǒfè ; èdzǒfè .
air pocket , n . , dzufạnfè .
air police , n . , zhìyěfè .
air popper , n . , gúgúrúkạncifè .
airport , n . , kpàtazúṇfìṇ .
airport tax , n . , èdǔ kpàtazúṇfìṇ .
airpower , n . , kágbófìṇ .
air pressure , n . , èdzupàfè .
air print , n . , kpópàgifè .
air pump , n . , jèdìṇfè .
air quality index , n . , gwàtùn lírikùṇfè .
air rage , n . , wùṇpáṇfè .
air raid , n . , èdògífè .
air-ready , adj . , sajiṇfè .
air rifle , n . , àkpáràfè .
air rights , n . , ebózhifè .
air roll , n . , èpiṇfè .
air sac , n . , jìga .
air scout , n . , tswàmàfìṇ .
airscrew , n . , kàṇtsafè .
air-sea rescue , n . , bubòya èdùsạnfìṇ .
airship , n . , eyakófìṇ .
airshow , n . , èwúfìṇ .
air shower , n . , dùshefè .
airsickness , n . , gùṇtáṇfìṇ .
airside , n . , kàṇsàṇfìṇ .
air sign , n . , èlǐfè .
air sock , n . , dàkùṇfè .
airspace , n . , làgǎṇfìṇ .
air sparging , n . , èmíbèfè .
air speed , n . , wùshìfè .
air splint , n . , èlàfè .
air spray , n . , fèshefè .
air station , n . , kiṇnigíbàfìṇ .
airstream , n . , nunjèfè .
air strike , n . , nyạkefìṇ .
airstrip , n . , diàriàfìṇ .
air stripping , n . , yèrètsafè .
airt , n . , nǎrurí .
air tanker , n . , kpạnkòmícifìṇ .
air taxi , n . , gòdǔgifìṇ .
air terminal , n . , kokobàfìṇ .
air terrorism , n . , eyédzújiṇfìṇ .
airtight , n . , fègbáṇnyi .
airtime , n . , èkáfè .
air-to-air , adj . , èfìṇ-ló- fìṇ .
air-to-surface , adj . , èfìṇ-zhǐṇ-títú .
air traffic , n . , rongípáfìṇ .
air-traffic control , n . , kàṇshì rongípáfìṇ .
air vesicle , n . , kónuwạṇgifè .
air vice-marshal , n . , bǎdòkò-gòsuṇbáfè .
air walk , n . , ezàṇfè .
airwaves , n . , gbánuwạṇzhìfè .
airway , n . , yèkódàfè .
air waybill , n . , guṇtèkayèkódàfè .
airway hyperactivity , n . , bibákàncéci .
airwoman , n . , nnǎfìṇ .
airworthy , adj . , kuṇkéfè .
airy , adj . , fègi .
airy-fairy , adj . , fègi-kòtògi .
aisle , n . , gwapàdà .
ait , n . , sùṇtí .
aitch , n . , écì .
aix-en-provence , n . , àyìkìzàṇ-puróvwàṇsì .
aizawl , n . , áyìjólì .
aja , n . , ndǎkókùṇ .
ajaccio , n . , ayácó .
ajar , adj . , adv . , kpéfía ; kpéfíagi .
ajax , n . , áyìjásì .
aji , n . , nnǎkókùṇ .
ajoupa , n . , vuṇkpé .
akamu , n . , kàmù .
akan language , n . , ákàṇ .
akan person , n . , ákàṇci .
akara , n . , kàrà .
akaryote , n . , nàsuṇkò .
akathisia , n . , nàduṇfé .
akee , n . , yìlá .
akela , n . , àkélà .
akene , n . , ràkpéci .
akimbo , adj . , kpákạn ; ekpá kạn .
akin , adj . , kezhǐ .
akinesia , n . , kiánkiánà .
akita , n . , àkítà .
akkad , n . , akádì .
akkadian , n . , akádìci .
akmolinsk , n . , akìmólínísíkì .
akoko tribe , n . , àkókó .
akrasia , n . , ràgbó .
akron , n . , ákurónì .
akubra , n . , akúburà .
akvavit , n . , nusuṇ ; nuwạṇ esuṇ .
a la , prep . , máki ; màmáki .
alabama , n . , àlábámá .
alabaster , n . , tákùṇbuṇ .
interj . , kasò !
a la carte , adj . , adv . , máki ejè .
a la carte agency , n . , dileba maki eje .
alacrity , n . , nạkàṇsuṇ .
aladdin , n . , alàdìṇnì .
aladdin s cave , n . , vuṇnu alàdìṇnì .
al-adha , n . , sállakó .
a la grecque , adj . , maki giriki ; mamaki giriki .
a la king , adj . , kentsu .
alameda promenade , n . , wùrùdokùṇgi .
alameda city , n . , àlamédà .
alamein , el , n . , elì àlaménì .
alamo , n . , dokùṇci .
alamo san antonio chapel , n . , alamó .
a la mode , adj . , máki mámi .
alamode , n . , mákimámigi .
alamogordo , n . , àlamógóridò .
alanine , n . , geràmạ .
alannah , n . , dzạkàṇmi .
alar , adj . , gwapàrí .
alarm , vt . , adj . , kugìrì .
alarm , n . , gìrìku .
alarmbell , n . , esáṇ kpogolo .
alarm clock , n . , efíṇ kpogolo .
alarming , adj . , etísạngi .
alarmist , n . , etísạnci .
alarm reaction , n . , gungùṇgá etísạn .
interj . , kasà !
alaska , n . , alásiká .
alaska highway , n . , keremì alásiká .
alaska native , n . , kîṇci alásiká .
alaska range , n . , lòjèrě alásiká .
alaska standard time , n . , èká tsàfàkùṇ alásiká .
alaskan king crab , n . , karatsu alásiká .
alaskan malamute , n . , màlámútìci alásiká .
alaskan peninsula , n . , kòsùṇtíkòkó alásiká .
alastrim , n . , làgwagi .
alate , n . , gwapàkùṇ .
alb , n . , bǒkùṇwò .
albacore , n . , bàkúrági .
albania , n . , alìbenìnyá .
albanian , n . , alìbenìnyáci .
albany , n . , alìbánì .
albatross , n .
kiàbǒkùṇ ; kuṇkiàcibǒkùṇgi .
albedo , n . , púrádzi .
albeit , conj . , àmâdě .
albendazole , n . , zhìpúnîngi ; zhìsuṇpúkùṇnîn .
alberich , n . , alìbéríkì .
albert , n . , alìbàtì .
albert edward nyanza , n . , alìbàtì edìwódì nyạnzà .
albert , lake , n . , ewàṇkó alìbàtì .
alberta , n . , alìbàtà .
albertite , n . , alìbàtìci .
albertosaurus , n . , gbǎgbǎlûalìbàtì .
albescent , adj . , púrágà .
albigenses , n . , alìbìcizhì .
albinism , n . , biabiájiṇ .
albino , n . , biabiá .
albion , n . , alìbinyạn .
albumen , n . , púkùṇgi .
alchemy , n . , nyạsạtuṇ .
alcohol , n . , washi .
alcoholic , adj . , washigi .
aldehyde , n . , geràmạnu ; ege ràmạnuwạnci .
also see nupefiles al dente , adj . , nyíkàṇdugi .
aleph , n . , kákânyé .
a level , n . , tàràgi a .
alert notify , v . , tungwa .
alert , adj . , v . , patí .
a l espagnole , adj . , makí sìpenìci .
al fatah , n . , alì fàtáhà .
alhaji , n . , àlǎzhì .
alien , n . , ezàzhìwuru alien , adj . , zhìwuru .
alif , n . , kânyé ; kákânyégi .
alight , v . , ciṇkîn .
alight descend from up , v . , yá .
alike , adj . , adv . , lǒdạn .
alkali , n . , sankpegi .
a list , n . , yèbà a .
alive , adj . , lòsuṇ ; lò esuṇ .
al jazeera , n . , alì jàzírá .
all , adj . , kpátá .
allah , n . , álawù ; állahù .
allergy skin , n . , eshikó .
alleviate , v . , dàkàrà .
alleviation , n . , kàràdà .
alley , n . , fopìṇci ; èfo piṇpìṇci .
alligator , n . , èyi .
all in all , adv . , ṃàṃà tò jànja .
all-inclusive , adj . , fenyǐ .
download the full text of nupe dictionary below nupe dictionary pdf english-nupe-dictionary-current-edition-1 nupe dictionary download download nupe dictionary share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram facebook twitter linkedin pinterest reddit messenger messenger whatsapp telegram share via email nupe proverbs school of health minna courses related articles nupe dressing nupe language translation etsu nupe nupe film nupe songs nupe tribe leave a reply cancel reply check also close nupe traditional titles in nupe land top posts list of tribes in kaduna state nupe language translation assi college of health school fees rolim school of health minna nupe tribe diploma in law in nigeria nupe dictionary assi college of health admission requirements how to apply for dubai visa from nigeria taraba state university school fees categories school 149 law information 61 information 35 american information 28 kenya schools 15 nupe 14 uganda 13 biographies 10 india schools 8 fulani and hausa 8 ghana laws 6 translator 4 usa schools 3 hotels 3 debate 3 kanuri 2 copyright 2026 , all rights reserved home about us terms and conditions privacy policy disclaimer contact us back to top button close search for : close search for
nupe food menu coopills search for school law information american information biographies search for home nupe nupe food nupe nupe food share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram nupe food eyanbici be eni zowa e .
in this article , we shall be discussing the following : table of contents related articles nupe dictionary nupe proverbs nupe food toggle food why rice is a common feature in households diet nupe traditional food nupe pap nupe soup nupe cultural soups food from the book nupe people of nigeria author by muhammad kuta yahya .
he wrote : a major staple food that is common to many households in nupe land is rice .
this is prepared either as joloff rice or in the form of eje boci mashed rice .
the reason for this development is due to the fact that majority of the farmers both within and around fadama lands low land marshy areas which allow for the cultivation of rice , in communities like jima , doko , edozhigi , bacita , katcha , gbara etc have rice production as a major and profitable venture .
hence , the explanation .
why rice is a common feature in households diet in nupeland .
another delicacy that goes with rice is fish ; both smoked and fresh fish are in abundance , especially from adjoining tributaries around rivers niger and kaduna .
all villages and towns around the bank of these rivers and other smaller rivers engage in fishing activities all year round .
it is a tradition in nupe land to welcome visitors with delicious meals from rice and fish soup .
also , during ceremonies such as naming or marriage ceremonies as well as festivals like sallah end of ramadan id-el-fir or id-kabir celebrations , rice feast is a common feature .
read also nupe language translation other food types include mashed meal eje boci which hausas refers to as tuwo from sorghum , millet , and maize .
these are served on alternate basis with beans , cooked yam , potatoes and garri .
sometimes beans is mixed with yiwara ground sorghum or millet sprinked on beans after conversion into paste form .
other common foods are porridge from millet , sorghum or maize called kunu .
this is consumed along with certain snacks like akara bean cake , masa sorghum cake , mashe early millet cake or dankuwa special confectionery from acombination of fried ground nut and maize and lastly kuli-kuli made from groundnut after extraction of groundnut oil , where the paste from that process is fried ; this is popular with students as african biscuit .
these snacks are very important in nupeland because they facilitate casual eating especially among children when they like to soak garri and drink along with these snacks of interest .
most significantly , they are used to take breakfast when served as porridge .
this also brings to focus , the consumption of left over jekun that is cooked with fresh ingredients .
read also traditional titles in nupe land jekun is the second cooking of left- over food from previous supper .
this left-over is from eje boci mashed food of rice , millet , sorghum or maize origin .
several dishes are served with specific soups in nupeland .
some of these soups are stew made of tomatoes with either meat , chicken or fish .
it is good for all kinds of food ; it goes with eje boci , white rice , yam , etc .
other soups are ezowa bean soup significant for eje boci from rice and vegetable soup that is sometimes mixed with melon that is served along with eje boci rice .
others are ningbana from liquid ground sorghum .
ningbana is delicious if served with left-over jekun second cooking of left-over food .
other common soups are from herbiscus sobderifa calyx known as emagi , okro soup , baobab leaf soup kuka among others .
one significant soup ingredient in nupe land is kula processed locust bean that is nupe s version of dadawa hausa and iru yoruba .
nupe traditional food by : fatima isah gbangban food is anything we eat and make us survived .
nupe people has many food .
these include : eje yikuru yanboci mashed madi kunu kamu banbara efan banbara edzu gbankuru gbwarwagi biboci dzagagi e . t . c .
nupe pap the following are the nupe pap .
kunu kamu kunu kanwa kunu tsatsa kunu jekafa kunu dara kunu elo- nuwan kunu banga kunu gunba kunu emu read also sokodeke biography nupe soup the following are the nupe soup .
these are : eni danci eni masantogi eni kpwatwakpwatwangi or enigi kocita eni warami eni kin lagi eni emagi eni nugbere eni zowa eni kpakunkpaku ebeshe kokeni eni nigbanna eni mani eni nibolo eni gwakangi eni kanci eni ekpingi eni danma eni fungi etc the best nupe tranditional food is enyaboci be zowa e matching rice with beans soup nupe cultural soups by : fatima muhammad majahidu nupe cultural soups are the most sweetest among all in the africa , and the most lovable soup is beans soup they re very proud of the soup , because majority people recognises and like than any other ones and also in a healthy way is a protein , culturally .
nupe do make soup for their family every week ones or twice for them to know and understand how important the soup is in nupe culture .
it s undermost , if nupe man has any celebration or occasion to observe , beans soup most be prepared , because it s part of their traditional soup since their forefathers .
they have different types of soups , as follow : 1 grinded millet soup eni ningbana 2 okro soup -eni kpanmi 3 eni zowa -beans soup 4 eni emagi hisbiscus soup 5 dry okro soup eni tsuku 6 baobab soup eni kuka 7 fresh fish soup -eni yikan funfuru 8 mellon soup eni epingi 9 pumpkin soup eni ebeshe 10 masantogi , alefa , -vegetable soups 11 ninbolo 12 nungbere have found this post useful or inspiring ?
do let us know your thought by commenting below .
share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram facebook twitter linkedin pinterest reddit messenger messenger whatsapp telegram share via email nupe film nupe proverbs related articles nupe language translation nupe dressing list of nupe names traditional titles in nupe land nupe film nupe songs leave a reply cancel reply check also close nupe etsu nupe top posts list of tribes in kaduna state nupe language translation assi college of health school fees rolim school of health minna nupe tribe diploma in law in nigeria how to apply for dubai visa from nigeria taraba state university school fees how to create webmoney account in nigeria towns in kwara state categories school 149 law information 61 information 35 american information 28 kenya schools 15 nupe 14 uganda 13 biographies 10 india schools 8 fulani and hausa 8 ghana laws 6 translator 4 usa schools 3 hotels 3 debate 3 kanuri 2 copyright 2026 , all rights reserved home about us terms and conditions privacy policy disclaimer contact us back to top button close search for : close search for
nupe language translation menu coopills search for school law information american information biographies search for home nupe nupe language translation nupe translator nupe language translation share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram nupe language translation .
fatima muhammad majahidu .
in this article , we shall be discussing the following : related articles fulani words and meaning translate arab to indonesia translate inggris-indonesia table of contents toggle learn nupe language nupe greetings name of god in nupe nupe language to english nupe words and meaning nupe dictionary learn nupe language we have compilled many worlds and it meaning .
follow us .
nupe greetings emisazhi nya nupe 1- kube lazhin i means good morning .
2- kube yigidi i means good afternoon .
3- kube lozun i means good evening .
4- sayi lazhin means good night .
5- sayi eka degi means see you later .
6- you re welcome kube ebo e .
7- goodbye : -eh da e cin name of god in nupe nupe people called god with different names , and these names are : - soko god etsu king tsoci -owner of all bagi man nupe language to english 1- fedun bosoko o -have a seat please 2- kubetun i -thank you 3- ga gansun ma - never mind 4- fa be min nyi - i am sorry 5- ka mi fyagi nyi -excuse me for a minutes 6- ki e yi wo nyi o ?
-what is your name ?
7- wokin ?
-how much ?
8- babo wo e lo ?
-where are you going ?
9- bekangi wo a bami - i like your perfume 10- ki a kan o ?
-why not ?
11- be yigidi i - at noon 12- egan nana ge a !
-this is so bad !
13- min wu nyagban wo a - i can not bear it 14- sayi yigidi ga a lo -till sunset 15- ele she tsuwo - there was a fog yesterday 16- yigidi a dabo esun - it will be sunny tomorrow 17- min a fe da a -i have to leave 18- babo mi a da wun soko o ?
where can i worship ?
19- ki wo e wo ?
what do you feel ?
20- kpako yi kpikpeci the door is open 21- sanmana dana this is a sugar 22- wun nyami eka -she invited me 23- mi a wo gansun ko ?
- am i bothering you ?
24- kijin woci e tigi o ?
-why are you crying 25- wun da ezhi -she travel 26- gbarufu min wun yi o - he is my boyfriend 27- yawogi wun yi o - she is a married woman 28- soko a kpa - it s unfortunate 29- wo a min jingun - you cheated on me 30- wun a mangi bagi -she gave birth to a baby boy 31- min e wo etisan -am feeling headache 32- wun e cin ezawugi le he is watching television 33- wun dan nanceta o she is in the kitchen 34- min de cincin ya wo e - i love you 35- mi e wo eyiku -i m feeling dizzy 36- wun e kpakpa -he is coughing 37- mi e yayah -i m yawning 38- mi kun wo e ?
- did i offend you ?
39- mi de cincin ya wo e - i am in love you 40- mi na wo e vo i hate you 41- cingini wuncin ma the pounded yam is sweet read also nupe tribe nupe words and meaning the following are the nupe words and its meaning .
these are : 1 daro kettle 2 kata -room 3 donci motar 4 etun pestle 5 yigidi -sun 6 tswangi star 7 etswa moon 8 yengi -garden egg 9 kundugi -cup 10 kodogi -bucket 11 fingi razir blade 12 ewo -cloth 13 ewo -money 14 kpako door 15 gwalo -right 16 ekwa -pap 17 goga -well 18 sanwogi -phone 19 eya-kin train 20 eya finti -airplane 21 eya nuwan -boat 22 ede wrapper 23 eko -soap 24 tishegi -comb 25 zamigi lipstick 26 ruka -ring 27 ede tikpe -veil 28 ewo duru gown 29 nyatukpa -earring 30 emigi -vasline 31 eda shoe 32 enyakoro -necklace 33 tanzali eye-pencil 34 kwanseti -bra 35 yari -skirt 36 kankani -sponge 37 adikogi handkerchief 38 kungu -box 39 gura -bag 40 esa net 41 ekin -pin 42 ebi -knife 43 egban -rope 44 kasa -basket 45 ena -fire 46 nansa -matches 47 ebiko -sword 48 ekpa arrow 49 esa -chair 50 bayele -mirror 51 ekpa -ladder 52 ekpata bed 53 dzufagi -window 54 gwapin -left 55 gbanfere -hammattan 56 bokun -white 57 zhiko -black 58 tarabi bow 59 wogi -spoon 60 dukun -pot 61 nanceta -kitchen 62 fetswangi -fan 63 efin -clock 64 patakun -board 65 kata -umbrella 66 dzuko market 67 gangba warning 68 kpinba class 69 kpikpeba -school 70 ekpo possition 72 eba husband 73 nyimi wife 74 cingini -pounded yam 75 swalu -yam poured 76 cigban -tree 77 laban -dedication 78 nyagbanwu -perserverance 79 ekan -thorn 80 eyebakpako -microscope 81 naban -diamond 82 banagi -silver 83 yizhe -world 84 enyaba -counting 85 nashi -stove 86 ngakpe -had i know 87 jikana sand 88 lulu trade 89 mangara -calabash 90 zongun mat 91 tutunpere potash 92 mukote sheabutter 93 eka -charcoal 94 tuti pillow 95 sokun -broom 96 zoro robb 97 ete rubber 98 shekpata toilet 99 vovonta bathroom 100 dukun egun moulding pot read also nupe food nupe dictionary contact us to get a copy of nupe dictionary .
i hope you have learn nupe language translation .
have you found this post useful or inspiring ?
do let us know your mind by commenting below .
read also kantigi biography share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram facebook twitter linkedin pinterest reddit messenger messenger whatsapp telegram share via email list of nupe names nupe songs related articles nupe proverbs nupe food nupe dictionary nupe dressing list of nupe names traditional titles in nupe land leave a reply cancel reply check also close nupe nupe film top posts nupe dictionary nupe language translation list of nupe names law of evidence in nigeria minna airport translate inggris-indonesia nupe dressing list of emirs in gombe state coou cut off mark for law how to become a palmpay agent and earn a lot of money - how to make money from palmpay app categories school 149 law information 61 information 35 american information 28 kenya schools 15 nupe 14 uganda 13 biographies 10 india schools 8 fulani and hausa 8 ghana laws 6 translator 4 usa schools 3 hotels 3 debate 3 kanuri 2 copyright 2026 , all rights reserved home about us terms and conditions privacy policy disclaimer contact us back to top button close search for : close search for
nupe film menu coopills search for school law information american information biographies search for home nupe nupe film nupe nupe film share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram in this article we shall be looking at nupe firm and how it originated .
nupe firm the prime-movers of the nupe cinema started film-making since the late nineties into the early 2000s .
great nupe personalities that birthed the idea of producing , acting and directing nupe dramas comedies on-screen are late sadisu muhammad dgn , prince ahmed chado , late prince hussaini kodo , m . b .
yahaya babs and jibril bala jibril .
they are the people who made the move for nupe dramas to be on-screen and are the founders of the modern-day nupe film industry known as nupewood .
read also traditional titles in nupe land related articles sokodeke biography malagi biography kantigi biography history of nupe firm nupewood is a film and entertainment industry of all nupe speaking people in nigeria .
the industry come into existence when film maker in kogi , niger and kwara came together to form the i industry known as nupewood .
read also nupe dictionary the first nupe movie released was title teacher yakondunu which make salisu muhammad popular across the nupe kingdom .
nupewood has since produced more than a thousand entertaining movies in nupe space to the millions of nupe audiences .
read also kantigi biography share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram facebook twitter linkedin pinterest reddit messenger messenger whatsapp telegram share via email nupe songs nupe food related articles nupe language translation nupe songs nupe proverbs list of nupe names nupe dictionary nupe tribe leave a reply cancel reply check also close nupe traditional titles in nupe land top posts list of tribes in kaduna state nupe language translation assi college of health school fees rolim school of health minna nupe tribe diploma in law in nigeria how to apply for dubai visa from nigeria taraba state university school fees how to create webmoney account in nigeria towns in kwara state categories school 149 law information 61 information 35 american information 28 kenya schools 15 nupe 14 uganda 13 biographies 10 india schools 8 fulani and hausa 8 ghana laws 6 translator 4 usa schools 3 hotels 3 debate 3 kanuri 2 copyright 2026 , all rights reserved home about us terms and conditions privacy policy disclaimer contact us back to top button close search for : close search for
list of nupe names menu coopills search for school law information american information biographies search for home nupe list of nupe names nupe list of nupe names share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram nupe names and it s meaning .
by : ndagi abdullahi amana nupe 08034770801 whatsapp .
below are over 200 nupe names with their meanings and etymological origins outline .
these are few among the over 1000 nupe names in the book titled nupe names : their meanings and etymologies .
related articles nupe dictionary nupe proverbs nupe food 1 .
adama father of all hausa , kanuri : adamu 2 .
alfa islamic teacher yoruba : alfa islamic scholar arabic : khalipha caliph .
aluwo powerful 4 .
angulu holy person , savant , priest , undertaker , corpse priestly undertaker 5 .
antu also written as hantu favour , gift hausa : hannatu 6 .
audu servant of god hausa : audu 7 .
baba father , elderly hausa and kanuri : baba arabic : aba father .
ba bishe fowl master , poultry farmer baba master , father bishe fowl .
badoko horse master , horse keeper baba master , father doko horse .
ba kuso forest keeper , forest prophet baba father , master , seer kuso forest .
ba lukuku pigeon keeper baba master lukuku pigeon .
ba masin tailor ba baba master masin machine , sewing machine .
banma parent s elder baba father , elder nma parent .
banna mother s elder baba father , elder nna mother , madam .
ba wusa sacred person s man baba man , master wu person , thing esa holy , sacred .
bele sovereign , great king , monarch be ebe person ele almighty .
note : bele is a very ancient nupe royal title for a great emperor .
birama african semitic qur anic and biblical : ibrahim , abraham the african .
bologi fine , beautiful , handsome middle nupe : borogi smooth , soft old nupe : bwarwagi watery .
cata wrongly written as chata or chatta or chiata sovereign , head of state ca ce ece power ata king , emperor .
cece wrongly written as cheche powerful person ce ece power .
ceceko wrongly written as checheko great powerful cece powerful person ko great .
cekpa wrongly written as chekpa executive , officer , official ce power kpa ekpa death , killing .
ceninya wrongly written as cheninya commander , leader , head ce powerful eni person enya person .
dagaci wrongly written as dagachi monarch kanuri : dagaci old nupe : dagara , tagara , ata gara emperor of the gara nupe people .
dangana emperor hausa : dangana kanuri : dangana old nupe : tagara , ata gara emperor of the ancient gara nupe empire .
daninya wrongly written as daniyan kingly , sovereign , royalty da ta ata king ni , eni person enya person , body .
danjuma friday son hausa : danjuma son of friday hausa : dan son arabic : yawm al-jum at friday .
danladi also pronounced and written as danlade or dalade sunday son 29 .
danlami thursday son hausa : danlami son of thursday hausa : dan son arabic : yawm al-hamis thursday .
dantala tuesday son hausa : dantala son of tuesday hausa : dan son arabic : yawm ath-thalatha tuesday .
dari mighty , large , big , honourable person da eda big , large ri eri thing .
dewo wealthy , have money de have , possess ewo money , power , influence .
dokodza rein , horse rein doko horse dza edza rope , chain , rein .
dombashi also written as donbashi great lord , almighty king edo great ba eba lord shi eshi person .
dunguru emperor gara nupe : great king , emperor .
note : dunguru was the royal title of the emperor of the ancient nupe empire of dunguru otherwise known as atagara . .
dunfia wrongly written as dunfya monarch , king , head of state edun city , state efia king , monarch .
dunfia is an old nupe word used as the royal title of the king of the ife or eba nupe people .
a variant of this word as survived as alafin among the oyo yoruba people .
dwale almighty person , ruler dwa du great le , ele might , power .
dzukogi small market dzuko market gi small , little .
dzukoko big market , supermarket dzuko market ko great , large , big .
dzuma friday hausa : juma a friday arabic yawm al-jum a friday .
dzwafu aboriginal settlement , ancient town , old city dzwa edzwa original , ancient , prehistoric efu city , town , settlement .
ebo person , man old nupe : ebo person .
edozhigi campsite settlement , hut town edo hut , camp ezhigi settlement , town .
ejiko king , town head eji ezhi settlement , town ko person .
etsu king , god , sun derived from etsa , esa , isa ancient sara nupe trinity synonymous word for god , sun and the king .
gabi emperor , king , prince ega gara gara : king , emperor ebi king , emperor .
galadima emperor , king , royalty hausa : galadima kanuri : galadima gara nupe : garadi-ma king of the gara people .
gana emperor old nupe : gara emperor .
gata kingly , royal ga of ata king .
gbangba land , field , open land egba earth , land egba earth , land .
gborigi mighty person , very powerful person gbo mighty , powerful ri , eri thing gi , egi thing .
gboya giant gbo big , large eya person .
gimba lord , holy person , prophet egi thing , person eba lord , god .
ginya wrongly written as ginyan royal person egi prince , king enya person .
giwa great person , powerful person , elephant hausa : giwa elephant .
note : giwa is a royal salutation for a number of royal offices in reference to their greatness .
gogo queen , madam , aunty , grandmother middle nupe : gogo queen .
go ogbo shortened form of go wogbo empress , powerful queen go gogo queen wogbo ultimate power .
gulu holy spirit , sacred thing gu ku earth , death , spirit lu ru thing .
iye person iye soul life , iya person .
jiya king , chief eji ezhi settlement , town eya person .
jiwo king , chief eji ezhi settlement , town ewo power .
read also nupe dressing 62 .
kafa royal , kingly , king king old nupe : ka of , owner fa , afa , apa eba nupe king , ancient eba nupe empire .
kaka grandmother , aunty hausa : kaka godmother , grandmother old nupe : ancient , ancestor note : kaka is also an old nupe word meaning ancestor or ancient .
but the modern nupe meaning of kaka as grandmother or aunty derives from hausa .
kaso divine person , diviner , prophet ka of , thing so esa god , divinity .
katun knowledge hausa : karatun studies .
kere ground , land , earth eke earth re , ere thing .
keremi paved road , field , landmass kere land emi place , thing .
ketso holy person , holy thing ke ki thing , one tso tswa etswa esa holy , sacred , god .
kiatswa holy person , holy thing ki thing , one tswa etswa esa holy , sacred , god .
kobo prince , royal person , royalty ko koro king , emperor bo , ebo person .
kodi stranger , foreigner ko person di , edi tribe , language .
kofian king , kingly , royal person old nupe : ko ku thing , person fian efe king .
kolo king , emperor ; river spirit , river niger god , god of the river niger ko thing elo , ero water note : kolo is an old nupe word for water or the spirit of a river ; but in middle nupe kolo acquired the tropical meaning of a king .
koro king , emperor ; river spirit , river niger god , god of the river niger ko thing elo , ero water note : koro is an old nupe word for water or the spirit of a river ; but in middle nupe koro acquired the tropical meaning of a king .
kpako emperor old nupe : kpako kpakoro kpa great koro king note : kpako was a royal title of the emperor of the ancient koro or gara or bini nupe people .
kpotun ambassador kpo great , honourable tun tunci messenger , deputy .
kpwatwa also written as kpotwa king , emperor , empire old nupe : kpwatwa twakpwa tagwa tagwara tagara ata gara ata king gara gara , bini nupe people note : kpwatwa was an old bini nupe royal title of the nupe emperor who ruled over the vast atagara or tako nupe empire .
kpotwa see kpwatwa .
kudu pond , river , river niger , sea , ocean old nupe : kuduru ku thing duru river , stream , water .
kure warrior , hunter , butcher hausa : kure male hyena note : in modern nupe kure was initially used as a title to praise great and professional hunters .
kure is later on used to refer to the head of the butchers guild .
kuso holy , sacred , holy person , sacred king old nupe : kuso kusa ku of esa god , king .
kusodu mayor , chief , king old nupe : kuso sacred king edu settlement , nation .
kuta king old nupe : ku one ta ata king .
note : kuta is an ancient nupe title for a king much the same way as we use etsu as the royal title for a king today .
other synonymous variants of kuta includes kanta , akanda , kanda , guta , nda etc .
lakpene see lakpiania .
lakpiania also written as lakpiana ; wrongly written as lakpene or lekpene dreamer , oracle , spiritualist , fortuneteller old nupe : lakpiania dream la one , owner , the kpiania kpeara kpe ara lie down , sleep , dream , consult the spirit world , serve as a spiritual medium .
legbo jinn , genie , spirit ; mighty , powerful old nupe : legbo water spirit le owner egbo might , power , influence .
lerama prince , royal person , royalty hausa : yerima kanuri : yerima governor of the north yeri north ma king .
liaba eba land mbiddle nupe : ele aba , ile aba ebaland eli ele land aba eba , ebi , ebe , egbe , bini nupe subtribe .
lile landlord , feudal lord , mighty person , chief , king , emperor li person , thing le ele land .
note : lile is an old nupe word meaning landlord and used to referred to a feudal lord .
it was used in middle nupe as a royal title in reference to a king or a ruler in general .
the fulani jihadists came and banned the use of lile in reference to a king but it has survived into modern nupe as the royal title of the chief of mokwa .
lolo song , music old nupe : elo talk , speak , sing .
lukpan executioner , official killer , warrior , military officer lu owner kpa ekpa death , killing .
madaki chamberlain in charge of animal husbandry hausa : madaki madawaki mai dawaki shepherd .
note : madaki or madawaki is derived from the hausa term for a shepherd but madaki was conferred by the fulani rulers of nupe on a powerful royal personage who is an influential member of the emirate council and also a leading member of the order of waziri .
maji see mazhi .
majin see mazhi .
makun crown prince , heir apparent ma mamman prince kun , ekun powerful , eminence .
mamman prince , honourable , chief , great person , parent old nupe : mamman prince ema great , big .
mandzwakwa aborigines , aboriginal people , original homeland man people , nation dzwakwa aborigine .
manfada palace person man person , thing fada hausa : palace .
manmasun prince esun mamman prince esun life .
manzuma prince zuma mamman prince zuma rock .
read also : nupe names and it s meaning 101 .
masaba prince saba mamman prince saba high priest , god s messenger , divine oracle .
masin tailor masin machine , sewing machine .
read also nupe tribe 103 .
mayaki war general , general hausa : mai yaki war general , warrior .
mazhi wrongly written as maji or majin mayor , chief of the town ma king zhi , ezhi settlement , town , city .
mukun food , foodstuff ; feeder , one who provides food for others mu emu food kun thing .
note : mukun originally referred to foodstuff but was also used to refer a wealthy philanthropist who feeds many poor people .
it is now used in modern nupe to refer to the head of the glassmakers guild . .
nagenu royal person , prince na person ge egi god , king nu person , one .
nagia wrongly written as nagya royal person , prince na person gia egi god , king .
nagun life , living thing , life-giving charm ena life egun thing .
natsu prince , royal person na person etsu king .
ndabida king , king of bida , master of bida , mister bida nda king , master , mister bida note : ndabida was the royal title of the king of bida when bida was a bini settlement before the advent of the nupe-fulani jihadists .
ndabini bini man nda man , master bini an ancient nupe subtribe note : the bini forms the largest nupe subtribe today and they are in fact the people solely , but wrongly , referred to as the nupe people today .
ndabisan chief of the bisan nupe people nda master , chief bisan a subtribe of the ancient yisa nupe people .
ndace king , ruler , leader , great master nda master ece great note : ndace originally referred to a great leader or a king but is now used in modern nupe to refer to a hunter .
ndadzan master drummer nda master edzan drummer , drum .
ndaeji see ndeji .
ndagi paternal uncle , master nda master egi thing , one .
ndagiman uncle man ndagi paternal uncle man teacher hausa : mallam arabic : mu alim .
ndako grandfather , ancestor ; emperor , king ndako ndakoro nda master koro emperor king river .
ndakogi ancestor , emperor ndakogi ndakorogi ndakoro emperor , ancestor egi thing , one , person note : in old nupe ndako or ndakoro is the royal title of the emperor of the nupe empire of atagara but in middle nupe ndako referred to the ancestors while in modern nupe ndako refers to a grandfather .
ndakobo prince doyen , paramount prince , heir apparent ; prince , royalty nda master , man kobo prince , royal person , royalty .
ndakuru holy master , priest nda master kuru holy spirit , sacred .
ndakuso godly man , holy master nda man kuso godly , sacred .
ndalati farm master maste , field master 124 .
ndalolo song master , musician nda master lolo song , music .
ndaman mister teacher nda mister , master man teacher .
ndaminin chamberlain , master of the house nda master minin chamber , inner house .
ndana shepherd nda master ena animal .
ndangboro paramount chief , big man nda master , man gboro big , chief .
ndasa sacred master , holy priest nda master sa esa holy , sacred .
ndatsakpe priest of holy land nda master , priest tsa holy , sacred kpe land .
ndayagi mister yoruba , yoruba man , yoruba master ; river niger spirit , river niger god nda master , spirit , god eyagi yoruba , river niger .
ndayako master emperor , great emperor nda master yako yakoro ekoro koro : emperor .
ndeji also written as ndaeji king , prime minister nda master , king eji ezhi town , settlement .
ninwoye very powerful person nin person woye powerful person .
nkoci wrongly written as nkochi councilor nko council ci of .
nnadzuma madam friday , friday lady nna lady , madam dzuma juma a hausa : juma a arabic : yawm al-jum a friday .
nnadzwa fresh lady , beautiful woman nna woman , madam , lady dzwa fresh .
nnafiania monarch , king , kingly nna owner fia fe efe king nia ni person .
nnagi maternal aunt , madam nna madam , mother egi person , thing , one .
nnako grandmother nna madam , mother ko great , grand .
nnakogi grandmother one nnako grandmother gi one , person .
nnakuso godly woman , priestess nna woman kuso 143 .
nnakun war general , warrior , death one , death nna thing , person , one kun ekun death .
note : nnakun radically means death and it was the name of the god of death and , later on , the name of the goddess of death who was personified in the amazon war general woman who always led the nupe army into all wars .
nnani madam , mother superior nna madam eni person .
nnanko dame , council madam nna madam , dame nko council , estate .
nnalolo songstress nna madam lolo song , music .
nmadu paterfamilias nma father , chief edu town , settlement ; person .
note : nmadu is an old nupe word and was not derived from muhammadu as some wrongly claimed .
nnamasa masa fry woman nna madam , lady masa deep fried cake .
nmanna mother s uncle nma maternal uncle nna mother .
nnasha wrongly written as nnashia lady aisha , madam aisha nna madam , lady asha islamic : aisha .
nnashirun black one , holy female child nna madam shirun holy child .
nnawusa sacred woman nna madam , woman wusa sacred person .
ntatu lady talatu , madam talatu n nna lady , madam tatu hausa : talatu arabic : yawm ath-thalatha tuesday .
nmanda great master , great ancestor nma great , parent nda master .
rofyan see rufian .
rufian wrongly written as rofyan or rufyan king ru of , one fian efe king .
note : among the ancient efe or ife or apa nupe people the king was referred to as the rufian .
it is a variant of this same word that has survived among the oyo yoruba as alafin .
other variants of rufian includes kofian , dunfian , etc .
read also nupe film 157 .
saba high priest , god s messenger , divine oracle sa esa god ba eba lord , master .
sagi empress , queen , king , emperor old nupe : sagi saragi tsaragi tsara king , divine king note : tsara or tsaragi was the royal title of the king of the ancient esa or yisa nupe people .
the nupe king tsara or tsaragi is known to hausa historians as saraki or kisra .
sakiwa kingly person , royal person saki saraki king , royal wa person .
sambo godly person fulani : sambo godly person , pious person sa godly ebo person .
shaba heir apparent , king , kingly , royal person sha esha eshi person eba lord .
sheshi angel , sky king , god old nupe : sheshi sky person eshe sky eshi person .
shiru black one , holy child shi eshi black ru thing , one .
note : in ancient nupe culture shiru , meaning the black one , is the sacred name given to a child born with a caul who is believed to be a holy child from the gods .
shirun a variant of shiru ; see shiru .
sode a variant of soje or soji ; see soje .
soje sacred king 167 .
sokyara holy master , priest so esa god , divine ki thing , one ara ena person , body .
sonfada wrongly written as tsonfada prime minister hausa : sanfada sarkin fada king of the palace san sarkin king of fada palace .
sonfadako wrongly written as tsonfadako or sonfarako great prime minister sonfada prime minister ko great .
sonfawa head butcher hausa : son san sarkin king of fawa skin , hide .
soninya queen hausa : sarauniya queen .
sonmazhi wrongly written as sonmaji professional son san sarkin king mazhi professional .
suman african arabic : usman the african .
swasun living , lively person , person full of life swa esun life sun esun life .
tako monarch , emperor , great king tako takoro tagara ata gara emperor of the ancient gara nupe empire note : atagara was a great empire of ancient nupe .
atagara was also known as atakoro or takoro and the emperor of takoro was known as takoro or simply as tako .
tatu tuesday hausa : talatu arabic : yawm ath-thalatha tuesday .
tenin monday hausa : tani arabic : yawm ath-thani monday .
tetengi small , little ete ground , land , tree .
tsado holy town , sacred city etsa holy edo town , settlement , land , earth .
tsadu holy river , river niger ; holy town , sacred town , holy settlement etsa holy , sacred edu water , river , river niger ; town , settlement .
tsadza holy person etsa holy , sacred dza , edza person .
tsaragi king , sacred king , kingly ; godly ; sun old nupe : tsaragi tsara etsa king , sun , god note : tsara or tsaragi was the royal title of the king of the ancient esa or yisa nupe people .
the nupe king tsara or tsaragi is known to hausa historians as saraki or kisra .
tsonfada see sonfada .
tsonfadako see sonfadako .
tsudi wrongly written as tsoede foreign king , stranger king etsu king edi language .
tsunyankpa lanlord , feudal lord , principal etsu king , principal nyankpa land , principality .
tswaida also rightly written as tsoda or tsoida sacred king , holy ruler tswa etswa god , sacred , holy da ta ata king .
tswanku also tswankuku holy one , holy person tswa etswa god , sacred , holy ku thing , person .
tswankuku a variant of tswanku ; see tswanku .
tswanya ruler , king , royal person old nupe : tswanya king tswa etswa etsu king enya person .
tswasha divine king tswa etsu king sha 192 .
ture european , white man , foreigner hausa : ture , turai , bature european ture , toro , toronkawa white fulanis .
wambai minister , king s messenger , lord s person hausa , kanuri : wambai minister was person eba lord .
wogbo great power ewo influence , power gbo big , great .
woye powerful person wo ewo power ye iye iya person .
wusa sacred person wu person , thing esa holy , sacred .
yabagi lord s person , king s officer ya iya person bagi lord .
ya iye person , senior person ya senior , person iye , iya person .
yaman elder teacher eya elder person man hausa : mallam arabic : mu alim .
yanda elder master eya elder person nda master .
yawo person , wife old nupe : yawo person iya eya person ewo thing .
yerama prince , royal person , royalty hausa : yerima kanuri : yerima governor of the north yeri north ma king .
yerima prince kanuri : yerima governor of the north yeri north ma king .
yisa king , sun , god old nupe : esa ancient sara nupe trinity synonymous word for god , sun and the king .
yitsu a corruption form of zhitsu ; see zhitsu .
zhiri a variant of zhirin chief , king ; black one ezhi town eri thing , person note : in ancient times the head or chief or even the king of a town or a city was known as zhiri or zhirin which meant owner of the town .
zhirin a variant of zhiri ; see zhiri .
zhitsu king ezhi town etsu chief , head we have many nupe names .
these are few nupe names among many .
if your nupe names is not included , kindly comment below .
share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram facebook twitter linkedin pinterest reddit messenger messenger whatsapp telegram share via email traditional titles in nupe land nupe language translation related articles nupe film nupe songs etsu nupe nupe tribe traditional titles in nupe land nupe dressing leave a reply cancel reply check also close nupe nupe language translation top posts list of tribes in kaduna state nupe language translation assi college of health school fees rolim school of health minna nupe tribe diploma in law in nigeria how to create webmoney account in nigeria towns in kwara state how to become a palmpay agent and earn a lot of money - how to make money from palmpay app kampala university courses and tuition fees categories school 149 law information 61 information 35 american information 28 kenya schools 15 nupe 14 uganda 13 biographies 10 india schools 8 fulani and hausa 8 ghana laws 6 translator 4 usa schools 3 hotels 3 debate 3 kanuri 2 copyright 2026 , all rights reserved home about us terms and conditions privacy policy disclaimer contact us back to top button close search for : close search for
traditional titles in nupe land menu coopills search for school law information american information biographies search for home nupe traditional titles in nupe land nupe traditional titles in nupe land share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram the traditional titles in nupe land .
in this article , we shall be discussing the following : related articles nupe dictionary nupe proverbs nupe food table of contents toggle nupe royal titles nupe civil titles nupe military titles nupe trade title nupe women s titles nupe village head titles discuss the leadership in nupe kingdom nupe royal titles in kinnupe we have many traditional titles in nupe land .
these are : 1 .
etsu 2 .
shaba 3 .
kpotun 4 .
maku 5 .
madami 6 .
nagenu 7 .
nakorji 8 .
lakpene 9 .
kafa 10 .
ginya 11 .
benu 12 .
fogun 13 .
kusodu 14 .
ceceko 15 .
taka 16 .
lukpan 17 .
cekpa 18 .
tsoyida 19 .
tswashako 20 .
rani nupe civil titles these are traditional titles confers to any loyal civilian in kinnupe by his royal highness .
these are : 1 . makama 2 .
sardauna 3 .
magajin gari 4 .
ndeji 5 .
sonfarako 6 .
tswanya 7 .
madaki 8 .
wali 9 .
swajiya 10 .
santali 11 .
mijindadi 12 .
dan masani 13 .
nnafyanea 14 .
tswakuku 15 .
tabo 16 .
man takada 17 .
garkuwa read also malagi biography nupe military titles the following are the nupe military titles .
these are 1 .
mayaki 2 .
ubandawaki 3 .
sokiara 4 .
sonmasun 5 .
saganu 6 .
tsadza 7 .
galadima 8 .
ejiko 9 .
turaki 10 .
nagun 11 .
tsowa 12 .
sonfadako 13 .
barize 14 .
soje 15 .
yerima 16 .
waziri read also nupe dictionary nupe trade title the following are nupe trade titles and it meaning .
these are : 1 .
makun head brass- worker 2 .
sokyara head , berber 3 .
sanfawa head , butcher 4 .
ndaceko head , hunter 5 .
egba head , carpenter 6 .
masaga head , glassworker 7 .
majin kinpa head , leather worker 8 .
kuta fisherman 9 .
bagba wood- worker 10 .
dokodza head blacksmith 11 .
majin cigbe head traditional medicine 12 .
majin nya lechi beads worker 13 .
etsunu head farmer dodondawa 14 .
dokaji 15 .
amana daniyan 16 .
dan ubandaki nupe giwa read also nupe proverbs nupe women s titles the following are traditional titles for women .
these are : 1 . sagi head of women 2 .
soniyan head of market women 3 .
wogbo 4 .
ninwoye nupe village head titles the following are the nupe village head titles .
these are : 1 .
hakimi 2 .
etsu yankpa 3 .
ndazhitsu discuss the leadership in nupe kingdom the leadership in kinnupe is the same as any other leadership in africa .
leadership in kinnupe move from person to person .
in every community there must be a leader which the take the responsibilities confers on him .
check aboved sub . topic to know the traditional tittle in kinnupe .
have you found the post useful or inspiring ?
do let me know your thought by commenting below .
share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram facebook twitter linkedin pinterest reddit messenger messenger whatsapp telegram share via email etsu nupe list of nupe names related articles nupe tribe nupe songs list of nupe names nupe film nupe language translation etsu nupe leave a reply cancel reply check also close nupe nupe dressing top posts list of tribes in kaduna state nupe language translation assi college of health school fees rolim school of health minna nupe tribe diploma in law in nigeria how to apply for dubai visa from nigeria taraba state university school fees how to create webmoney account in nigeria towns in kwara state categories school 149 law information 61 information 35 american information 28 kenya schools 15 nupe 14 uganda 13 biographies 10 india schools 8 fulani and hausa 8 ghana laws 6 translator 4 usa schools 3 hotels 3 debate 3 kanuri 2 copyright 2026 , all rights reserved home about us terms and conditions privacy policy disclaimer contact us back to top button close search for : close search for
nupe dressing menu coopills search for school law information american information biographies search for home nupe nupe dressing nupe nupe dressing share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram nupe dressing is the topic of today .
by fatima muhamnad majahidu in this article , we shall be discussing the following : table of contents toggle what is the origin of nupe ?
nupe culture nupe facial marks nupe dressing nupe cultural dress nupe day what is the origin of nupe ?
firstly , who are nupes ?
in short , nupes called themselves nupe , and they re speaking nupe .
the first person that speak nupe in the world is agba bin annafi .
their neighbors are ; hausa , gbagy , and yoruba .
nupes are described as the kind of people who like living in riverine area .
nupes are warriors , fishermen and farmers .
related articles nupe dictionary nupe proverbs nupe food nupe culture culture is described as the total way of life of people , such as their foods dressing marriage dancing greetings , facial mark e . t . c .
nupe dressing , nups people have the most richest , beautiful and colourful culture in the whole africa , in term of their foods enyagicizhi marriage yawojin greetings emisazhi dancing enyanya dressings ewofon respect cinwan facial mark etsa creativity enyatswa .
nupe facial marks etsa nupencizhi 1-kpele nini 2- nwannwan finba 3-etsa eyagi 4-mungoro fini 5-kalangu 6-yegunla 7-eyesa 8-kpele guta 9-jekafagi 10-kpatsungi etsa koro e . t . c nupe dressing nupe people dress fully without living any parts of their body outside except their face and legs , in olden days their ladies nyatsugi tie two yards of wrapper ede tsukun guba with cloth and hair tie rufuta and two yards ede tsukun guba as veil ede tikpe to cover all their body .
read also kantigi biography and for the old women , they tie two yards on their waist and two yards on top of the cloth , and they also tie two and half yards of wrapper which is called ede ladan the ede ladan is sew in this way ; the two yards of wrapper will be cut into two pieces and they will put one yard at the center of the two yards and sew it together , that makes the wrapper bigger , with cloth and hair tie with two yards of wrapper to cover all their body .
for men , their dressing is ewoko be nindan toh tsanka be fula e .
nupe cultural dress ede dandan nupencizhi in africa , nupe dressing , most people recognise nupes with the popular nupe attire , which is ede eko kpara , and ede kpasa , nupe kpasa edumana contain three colors , and each of the colors has it meanings .
it represent nupes as farmers , warriors , and fishermen .
the colors are green , blue and red .
the red stand for : -warriors , green stand for : -farmers , and the blue stand for : -fishermen .
apart from the two popular wrappers , there are so many others , which include the followings : - ede zongun ede kata boci ede doko ede sokun asibi bafin nnadzwa ebwa kokontaba eko kpara kpara gogi ego kpara dini e gi gogo egun o bishe bako ede kpasa ede masalaci ede aa ba ca da abcd ede gute ede giyeko ede fefe ede bici bishe ede mamugi cinzhin mungoro cinzhin ede makpalaya ede shelu ede elogi ede emi kwankwa ede kukumadi e . t . c .
nupe cultural days read also nupe language translation 1 national nupe day 2 wedding nupe day 3 farming day 5 magic race day 6 horse race day 7 fishing day 8 local wrestling day nupe day efo nupencizhi the nupe day is a traditional and a celebration made in nigeria every 26th of june , the celebration is made by all the nupes around the community every year .
this day is celebrated to mark the only day etsu bubakar defeated the british colonial , and the remembrance of the day started since when the 15th etsu nupe alhaji dr , yahaya abubakar bagadozhi comes to the throne .
people gathered from different angle of nupe land to mark this day with prayers , and also with their cultural dressings , playing with horses and mascurades , magicians also play their roles , banding and dance to mark and remembered the beautiful and unforgettable day in bida .
-wedding nupe day yawo wedding it s celebrated by a nupe daughter a day before her marriage , to showcase her culture and tradition , the parents , relatives , friends , neighbors and others gathered for the celebration of her getting married .
read also traditional titles in nupe land farming day efo enunu -farming day is a festival celebrated in kinnupe to show that they re real farmers and how important farming is in nupe land and nigeria at large , and to show they re the majority farmers in nigeria .
-magic race day efo enyamacizhi magic race day is a traditional day for all the magicians in nupe community , they show their magics how strong and powerful powerful they are .
-horse race day efo eci man doko horse race day : -is a traditional day of celebration for all nupes , they bring out all horse in the nupe community to play and round all the center city of nupe land .
-fishing day efo rigata fishing day is a traditional festival celebrated in kinnupe to recognises and to remembered that nupes are fishermen , people come out to competite , they will sink inside water for some minutes and whosesoever bring our the most biggest fish will be the winner of the competition , and people will dance and celebrate the day with happiness .
-local wrestling day gani local wrestling day is celebrated once in a year in one side of nupe land , it s a fight between peoples in other to show their power and to know the most powerful person among and among them and to identified the winner , it was there since our fore father day .
have found this post useful or inspiring ?
let us know your thought by commenting bellow .
share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram facebook twitter linkedin pinterest reddit messenger messenger whatsapp telegram share via email nupe tribe etsu nupe related articles list of nupe names nupe songs nupe film traditional titles in nupe land nupe language translation etsu nupe leave a reply cancel reply check also close nupe nupe tribe top posts list of tribes in kaduna state nupe language translation assi college of health school fees rolim school of health minna nupe tribe diploma in law in nigeria borden of proof nupe dictionary assi college of health admission requirements how to apply for dubai visa from nigeria categories school 149 law information 61 information 35 american information 28 kenya schools 15 nupe 14 uganda 13 biographies 10 india schools 8 fulani and hausa 8 ghana laws 6 translator 4 usa schools 3 hotels 3 debate 3 kanuri 2 copyright 2026 , all rights reserved home about us terms and conditions privacy policy disclaimer contact us back to top button close search for : close search for
nupe tribe menu coopills search for school law information american information biographies search for home nupe nupe tribe nupe nupe tribe share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram by a . a zakari nupe tribe .
nupes are described as the kind of people who like living in riverine area .
nupes are warriors , fishermen and farmers .
in this article , we shall be discussing the following : table of contents toggle who are the nupe history of nupe nupe kingdom emirates in kinnupe towns and cities in kinnupe towns and cities in kinnupe , kwara state .
towns and cities in kinnupe , kogi state .
who is the founder of nupe kingdom ?
meaning of nupe nupe cultural attire nupe art nupe architecture nupe festival .
nupe tribal marks .
map of nupe kingdom who are the nupe nupe tribe is one of the ethnic group in nigeria mostly found in niger state , kwara state , kogi state , kaduna state and f . c . t abuja .
related articles nupe dictionary nupe proverbs nupe food the dialect speaking today as a nupe is not actually called nupe but a subdivision known as bini .
according to professor ndagi abdullahi who says nupe is just like umbrella which encompasses with many dialects such as bini , gbagyi , dibbo , kakanda and so on .
these dialects were referred as nupe before bini came to dominated everywhere in kinnupe .
bini dialect become famous and the most speakable dialect in kinnupe .
bini dialect is the one most people knows today as nupe but the reality is , nupe tribe is referred to aforementioned dialects .
today , all the aforementioned dialects , referred to their self as nupe except gbagyi people .
professor ndagi abdullahi assert that gbagyi people were nupe because even the dialect of gbagyi and bini is almost the same thing and they cane from the same source .
bini dialect is known today as nupe which there are approximately 4million people speaking the dialect .
the nupe tribe is mostly spoken in niger state .
most of them are muslims and some christians .
nupe language is also spoken in kwara , kogi , kaduna and federal capital territory .
history of nupe according to professor ndagi abdullahi , nupe people were originally from kinnupe not as claimed by so many writers , that nupe people were originated from nubia or egypt .
nupe people were here for millionious years even before coming of s . f nadel who make this false assertion that nupe people were originated from egypt .
according to proffessor ndagi abdullahi that s . f nadel was wrong and his resource were baseless when he says nupe people originated from egypt .
nupe people has nothing to do with egyptians origin .
and other source that says nupe came from nubia were the assertion of some muslim scholars which their assertion is base on imagination .
read also nupe dressing they were trying to colorate nupe tribe and nubia base on the pronocement which they make a conclusion that is one and nupe people must have originated from the area .
professor ndagi abdullahi wrote that nupe people did not originated from anywhere aside of kinnupe and he reference h . d .
gunn and f . p .
connant , using scientific linguistic analyses based on professor joseph greenberg s groundbreaking works on african ethnography and linguistics .
nupe kingdom the nupe kingdom range from niger state particularly the zone a , extent to kwara and kogi .
bida is the capital city of kinnupe with first class emir etsu nupe .
emirates in kinnupe the following are the 9 golden emirates in kinnupe .
these are : 1- agaie emirate niger state 2- bida emirate niger state 3- gboloko emirate kogi state 4- lapai emirate niger state 5- lafiagi emirate kwara state 6- lokoja emirate kogi state 7- patigi emirate kwara state 8- tsaragi emirate kwara state 9- tsonga emirate kwara state towns and cities in kinnupe the following are the towns and cities in kinnupe , niger state .
these are : 1 agaie 2 badeggi 3 boro 4 bida 5- doko 6- edozhigi 7- enagi 8- evunti 8- gbajibo 9- gbara 10- gulu 11- jebba 12- katcha 13- kata eregi 14- kutigi 15- kutiriko 16- lapai 17- lemu 18- makusidi 19- makwa 20- muye 21- rabba 22- wushishi 23- zungeru towns and cities in kinnupe , kwara state .
these are : 1- bachita 2- gbugbu 3- kpada 4- lafiagi 5- lade 6- patigi 7- tsaragi 8- tsonga towns and cities in kinnupe , kogi state .
these are : 1- abugi 2- ajigido 3- budon 4- eggan 5- gboloko 6- geregu 7- lokoja these area are known as kinnupe , nupeland or nupe kingdom .
who is the founder of nupe kingdom ?
when we talk about the founder of nupe kingdom , what immediately come to people s mind is , tsoede or edegi .
the truth is that tsoede or edegi was not the founder of nupe as many people claimed .
nupe kingdom was in existence even before tsoede come into existence .
how can we believed this fabrication for the fact that he is not the first or his generation were not the first of nupe people .
read also etsu nupe accouding to professor ndagi abdullahi amana nupe if tsoede will place at all , he would be better be position as re-founder of nupe kingdom but not actually the founder of nupe as many writers claimed .
the question of who is the founder of nupe could better be answer as nobody knows the first founder of nupe because our ancestors are not people who read and write , so they didn t keep any record regards to any historical event .
and this happened across africa .
african history is narrated but not documented .
that is why it hardly to know the reality of african history and this white people came to africa and begins fabricating things base on assumption just because we can t read and write .
but thanks to them and almighty , we could be able to write and read now , we can correct all the blunder they have been telling us in the past .
meaning of nupe as we mentioned above nupe is one of the ethnic group in nigeria which consists of bini , dibbo , kakanda , gbagyi e . t . c .
the direct meaning of nupe is derived from two nupe word : nu which means sharp and pe means proud .
nupe are known to be sharp , proud , fearless and intelligent which it was recorded in history that most of their ancestors were warriors .
nupe cultural attire according to fatima muhammad majahidu who wrote on nupe cultural dress ede dandan nupencizhi .
she said ; in africa , most people recognized nupe with the popular nupe attire , which is ede eko kpara , and ede kpasa , nupe kpasa edumana contain three colors , and each of the colors has it meanings , as the nupes are farmers , warriors , and fishermen : the colors are green , blue and red .
the red stand for : -warriors , green stand for : -farmers , and the blue stand for : -fishermen .
apart from the two popular wrappers , there are so many others , which include the followings : - ede zongun ede kata boci ede doko ede sokun asibi bafin nnadzwa ebwa kokontaba eko kpara kpara gogi ego kpara dini e gi gogo egun o bishe bako ede kpasa ede masalaci ede aa ba ca da abcd ede gute ede giyeko ede fefe ede bici bishe ede mamugi cinzhin mungoro cinzhin ede makpalaya ede shelu ede elogi ede emi kwankwa ede kukumadi e . t . c .
nupe art nupe people are very intelligent which some of them were bless with a gifts of art .
when we talk about art what comes to mind is tswata muku in bida , this is where many design where make and somany things were cave .
among them are : pot ladle spon hoe e . t . c read also malagi biography many things were make in this company , which go across nigeria .
nupe artist do many things including the design of nupe palace .
nupe architecture we have many architecture in nupe land which they are expert in their field .
nupe architect were call to work at anytime when the need arise from his royal highness .
nupe architect do gave his royal highness a synopsis how the kingdom will look like .
nupe festival .
nupe festival this is an event celebrated by nupe people on the 26 of june of every year by his royal highness alhaji yahya abubakar the etsu nupe to mark the golden historical battle that happened between nupe army and great britain which nupe army defeated great britain army headed by sir george taubman goldie s .
this battle took place on 26th of june 1896 .
and this brought about the battle of bida some months later 26th and 27th of january 1897 and it ended with the british conquest of bida .
nupe festival is celebrated in the palace of etsu nupe which many nupe cultural activities will be displayed such as fishing , farming , masquerade and so on .
nupe day was not only celebrated as national festival on 26 of june by the nupe people but also include in their marriage event .
nupe tribal marks .
nupe tribal marks this is an identification or symbol of nupe child every where he she go in this world .
the following are nupe tribal marks etsa nupencizhi .
these are : 1-kpele nini 2- nwannwan finba 3-etsa eyagi 4-mungoro fini 5-kalangu 6-yegunla 7-eyesa 8-kpele guta 9-jekafagi 10-kpatsungi etsa koro e . t . c .
you may ask why is this nupe tribal marks ?
some people view it as means of identification while others says no , its just a tribe mark as it was part of nupe culture .
i was previlage to attended one of nupe class organised by adamu idris manarakis in 2017 , which he invited the then niger state commissioner of information in person of jibrin baba ndace which he told us his story to london when he was ask about his nupe tribal marks .
he said he told then that ; only nobles has this nupe tribal marks .
if you are nobody in nupe kingdom , no mark for you , but if you are somebody they should be a sign that this person is somebody that is the purpose of this marks .
map of nupe kingdom have you found this post useful or inspiring ?
do let us know your thought by commenting below .
tags nupe nupe news share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram facebook twitter linkedin pinterest reddit messenger messenger whatsapp telegram share via email chipper cash registration nupe dressing related articles nupe dressing list of nupe names nupe language translation etsu nupe nupe film traditional titles in nupe land leave a reply cancel reply check also close nupe nupe songs top posts list of tribes in kaduna state nupe language translation assi college of health school fees rolim school of health minna nupe tribe diploma in law in nigeria borden of proof nupe dictionary assi college of health admission requirements how to apply for dubai visa from nigeria categories school 149 law information 61 information 35 american information 28 kenya schools 15 nupe 14 uganda 13 biographies 10 india schools 8 fulani and hausa 8 ghana laws 6 translator 4 usa schools 3 hotels 3 debate 3 kanuri 2 copyright 2026 , all rights reserved home about us terms and conditions privacy policy disclaimer contact us back to top button close search for : close search for
nupe proverbs menu coopills search for school law information american information biographies search for home nupe nupe proverbs nupe nupe proverbs share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram nupe proverbs author by our own isyaku bala ibrahim .
check table of content .
nupe proverb from the book eganmaganzhi nupe nupe proverbs .
wo kpe nyina na , wo kpe esun à .
if you know today you do not know tomorrow .
man is ignorant of the future .
tukpapa wun è lugwa tukpa tsu à .
a reminder does not cause dumbness .
a reminder does not cause harm rather it enlightens an individual .
erwagi gan séfu , wuntso ma na kin bo à .
the crippled draws attention to stand for prayers while he is still on the floor .
show a clear commitment towards something before asking others to emulate you .
eza ù la eda ù ya tun ka kun na wun è woma egwako na kacin à wun à be à ma ù zunye .
a person should leave the stage when the ovation is loudest or else he will shamefully leave it later .
people should do things at their appropriate times .
nangi ga e za be eshigi , wun à be à ca ebi nyi gi .
any sheep that follows a dog about will soon start eating faeces .
be careful in choosing a friend or a partner as he she might positively or negatively influence your life .
eza è de ekò dan egwa ò ede ù shishikan à .
no one in possession of soap will allow it clothes to remain dirty .
with adequate resources at one s disposal , one will solve alot of problems .
wun jin za è wun kuso na wun kana à .
it is not the person that owns the forest that owns its baboon .
you cannot be in contol of everythings .
egwa la mufu lo ená ò , a ma tsukun tsá ma à wa wun ò .
it is the hand that takes an iron-stove into a fire , but it is a stick that will bring it out .
people should be careful of the negative consequences of their actions .
éyé na shi na ékó na ; zana da ù na à masha .
the night has set-in on the road ; whoever will ply it must take caution .
whatever you do not have detailed explanation on should be treated with caution .
eza è gi yiwara zo vo wun kun gwa wun à .
a person does not finish eating a cooked grain-flour meal and wriggles his hands into the plate .
you cannot reverse what has been concluded .
wun jin na eza lé be nyi na , wun è san be nyi à .
it is not what a person sleeps with , that he orshe wakes up with .
life is generally dynamic , it is subject to changes .
nyana è li li na wun è zo zo .
what is picked consistently is consistently finishing .
people should be conscious of things they constantly use , as they will certainly finish .
zandondo ù la emi ù tú égún mi nda ù .
everyone should go by their inherited family norms .
people should always respect their family ethics .
kankuru na janfuru dan nuwon ò na be tsun yikán tsun .
a hippopotamus that just enters into the water meets the fish therein .
the new arrivers should give regards or respect the old hands .
nyana saka lo égó na , wun be tsun nyana lé égó na tsun .
whatever comes into the bush early in the morning meets what slept therein .
there are differences between old and and new things is clear .
nyana è ge eza na wun ga yizheci è nanvó , nyana ma è nyí eza na wun ga è dagun ò .
what will make an individual nice is avoided and what will make him bad is happily welcomed .
people find it difficult to do the right things .
wo gá gba ezako , efo de à yi efo wotso be de ezako ye .
if you are obedient to your superior , someday you will become one .
there is wisdom behind obedience and respect of superior .
nyagbanlaci è de enyandondo à .
a jealous person does not gain anything .
there is no any benefit for being jealous .
dagan yeshi ga bo è ca eci lazhin ò .
the morning race begins from the night .
the earlier the better .
it is always better to start a task early enough to meet the targeted result early enough .
eza è yi be kanwon è sungwa ò wun tán gbako à .
a person cannot be in possession of potash and have stomach ache .
when a person has a solution to a problem it should solve it or else it should not complain afterwards .
a ga è kín ò gongi má wa , wo fe tswa ewanko .
if you are praised for being a good hay harvester , be conscious of a python .
the applauded person should be cautious of making mistakes .
zawangi wun rayi à .
a man owns not it soul .
a man is not in control of it life .
it should therefore give maximum attention to whatever comes it way as soon as possible .
dagbá ku èsà , asara yi nya esatso .
an elephant that moved away with a net , the owner bears the lost .
whoever does not own a thing will show less concern if it is missen .
wo gá la yikuru dzodzo , madán à gun ò .
if you play with grain flour you will be hungry .
a person does not joke with where it gets it daily bread .
eza wún enya à wun de ewùnzhe ?
if a person does not own a thing , will it be angry over it ?
do not get angry over what does not belong to you .
wo yi da yi lo è , wotso ma ò la bicí ò kpé .
let us move forward , while you should also hastenly lead the way .
people should lead by example .
a gan majin ényà-donci à gbín , wo gan we gbigan ényà-donci .
the leader of mortar-drummers had sunk , and you are still demanding drums to be played .
this is used when a person is off-track or beating about the bush .
zana gba ebó ye na , wun ga ebo è kunmi .
whoever belittles the right reason , it will cause it problems someday .
always make use of the right decision or suggestion .
éyé dá wun má yékorogi à .
a treated eye will not produce eye-mucus .
a problem already solved will affect no one .
yi à lo , yi à lo ; wun ga è la zhi lo lokpa ò .
we will go , we will go ; is what makes a journey far .
to start a thing is what is always difficult .
bici ù tswa éwá , éwá ma ù tswa bici .
the leg should be careful with the snake and vice versa .
showing restrend is better than hurting one another .
tswa éyé !
tswa éyé !
gá yi cigbe éyé ò .
be careful with the eye ! !
is the best eye treatment .
prevention is better than cure .
dangi emi ga è won bishe emi ò .
it is a domestic cat that catches a chicken .
when you are familiar with a thing , you will know how to target or get it .
a la hankali à tswa lafiya .
make use of reasoning to make peace .
think before you act .
egi-ena ke nyizagi na ù yi ò , na gá pani wangi ná wun à fe ba zandondo , na ma pàni wangi à na è sa fi zandondo à .
a party-candidate is like a woman ; if she does her make-up very well , everyone will like her ; and if she does not , no one will like her .
always do your homework very well before doing any given task or aspiring for any position in life .
zana gbin nuwon be èwòko na wun gá nuwon è gbin ò .
whoever smims with a gown on will be drawn .
always do things rightly and avoid ambiguity .
kabo éyé-nnakogi nyaga wo be à , wun è ceka ba egi égí .
even if the aunty s eye cannot perform witchcraft anymore , but it does frightens a child .
what people have master will not easily fade away .
eza à ce ekpà , kin yaba ?
when one shoots an arrow does the ground get out of the way ?
do not expect impossibilities .
eni è zan eje wun kan gi gi wun à .
too much soup on solid-grain porridge will not prevent it from been eaten .
what must be done cannot be avoided .
eyiwárá ga pin dan èdò , nin nyi ù yi tsa tsa è .
if a grain of corn falls in the mud , the inside is still clean .
the truth or false cannot be concealed , it will surely come to be known .
yajinci jin nyana kagbo ù kun na .
the poor should go for what he can afford .
people should live within their means .
madangunci è kpe eje sánmu ye kperi à .
a hungry person does not know poisoned food .
extreme anxiety leads to obliteration .
yajinci è kpe shikanshi ede ù ye kperi à .
the poor does not differentiate between the dirt of his clothes .
this proverb is directed at people that do not find fault in whatever they do instead blame others .
eza bo bo kpa eshigi wun latswan be à ?
wo ga è tswan-tswan-nyi , eshigi gan wun dan na .
a person cannot keep a dog and hiss again ?
for any hissing sound made , the dog appears .
when someone is fed-up with a particular situation .
kara na nyagban pa na wun è lò eti à .
the luggage sensibly arranged will not be too heavy for the head to carry .
be very logical in carryout any assignment to guard against errors or mistakes .
read also nupe songs related articles nupe dictionary nupe proverbs nupe food popular nupe wise sayings from the book nupe the people of nigeria by yahya kuta read also nupe language translation 1 .
if a child is found walking in the night , there is an elder behind him .
if a child is climbing a tree with his hands relaxed , there is an elder holding and assisting him from below .
a patient should not be in a hurry to sleep , there is enough opportunity ahead in the grave .
they had wished you to sleep with hunger , but early the next morning you were seen eating prepared rice left over with chicken .
nobody sows good seed and reaps evil , nor will anybody who sows evil ever reap good result .
whatever you sow is what you reap .
hence , you do not sow millet and reap sorghum .
a child that answers for his father will be buried ahead of his father 7 .
nowadays , religious people are many , but godly people are few .
the person preserved by god will definitely be left alone by human being .
you don t go to the river with a basket , the way you go to the river with it is the same way you return with it .
the son of the soil is doing a bad thing , but it is that of the visitor that is obvious .
whatever is meant for a toad does not climb up .
tough aliyu aliyu is like whirled wind , aliyu is like thunderous rain , aliyu stays on top of mountain and sees next year , aliyu joined a canoe and the paddler says he is going down the slope , but aliyu insists on moving up stream .
kuta donbashi !
worthy praise for the leader of fishermen no man ever praises his wife , it is in the presence of a dog that an elephant enters the bush , and it is in her presence that the elephant will come out .
it is only cricket you catch , hold and break its legs but not a scorpion .
richness is not hereditary , poverty too is not inherited , you can be rich today and get poor tomorrow and you can also be poor today and become rich tomorrow .
if god relieves your burden throw away the carrier , but if human being should assist relieve your burden hold on to your carrier .
he that assists others is only helping himself ; equally , he that cheats on others is cheating himself because whatever you do to others will be paid back to you .
who is a blind man deceiving that he is sleeping ?
is there any difference between when he is awake or when asleep ?
it is from the point where farming starts that boundary demarcation is effected .
the tick koti that cow goes for grazing with , is that which kills a lamb .
fly that moves with a leopard will never eat rotten meat .
familiarity with a chicken does not prevent its slaughtering when needed .
a newly wedded young man must not go hunting for a buffalo or else the new bride will easily become a widow .
a widow should not celebrate , what took her husband is not yet fulfilled .
we should not be too proud , because grasses are growing on a mountain while others are dying in the fadama marshy land .
love breeds happiness while hatred breeds disaster .
the dog that will miss its way will never hear the sound of the whistle of its owner .
leave the dancing stage when the ovation is loudest , or else it is shame that will follow soon .
any goat that follows dog about will soon start eating faeces 30 .
if you dig a trench for a bird it will definitely come and pass ?
read also sokodeke biography have you found this useful or inspiring ?
do let know your thought by commenting below .
share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram facebook twitter linkedin pinterest reddit messenger messenger whatsapp telegram share via email nupe food nupe dictionary related articles nupe film list of nupe names traditional titles in nupe land nupe dressing nupe tribe nupe language translation leave a reply cancel reply check also close nupe etsu nupe top posts list of tribes in kaduna state nupe language translation assi college of health school fees rolim school of health minna nupe tribe diploma in law in nigeria how to apply for dubai visa from nigeria taraba state university school fees how to create webmoney account in nigeria towns in kwara state categories school 149 law information 61 information 35 american information 28 kenya schools 15 nupe 14 uganda 13 biographies 10 india schools 8 fulani and hausa 8 ghana laws 6 translator 4 usa schools 3 hotels 3 debate 3 kanuri 2 copyright 2026 , all rights reserved home about us terms and conditions privacy policy disclaimer contact us back to top button close search for : close search for
etsu nupe menu coopills search for school law information american information biographies search for home nupe etsu nupe nupe etsu nupe share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram etsu nupe is the etsu of all nupecizhi in the world .
in this article , we shall be discussing the following : table of contents related articles nupe dictionary nupe proverbs nupe food toggle etsu of nupe .
who is the first etsu nupe list of etsu nupe emir of nupe who is etsu of nupe etsu nupe palace etsu nupe net worth etsu of nupe .
this is a traditional tittle conferred to only emir of bida as the etsu of all nupe people .
emir of nupe is the leader of all nupezhi in the world .
be who you are , one s you re a nupe .
emir of nupe is your king .
you may want to know the position of other etsuzhi in kinnupe ?
example : emir of agaye .
emir of patigi emir of lafiyagi and any other etsuzhi in kinnupe .
the question will be better be answer as ; all the etsuzhi in kinnupe are under his royal highness etsu nupe .
it will be better we say emir of nupe is also the the etsu of etsuzhi in kinnupe .
read also traditional titles in nupe land emir of agaye , emir of lapai , emir of lafiyagi , emir of patigi e . t . c are all representative of there places .
each head the nupe of his locality .
as kinnupe is very large , their is need we have many kings as we have it today .
and among these kings , their is need they have a leader to be the eyeball of the kingdom .
that is the reason why emir of bida was chosen to be head of these kings .
and this is not restricted to a particular person or a ruling king .
this tittle is given to the emirate .
as history has it , bida emirate is not the first emirate to be confer with title of etsu nupe .
perhaps it might shift one day but for now bida emirate owns the tittle of etsu of nupe .
there are three houses in bida where etsu of nupe rotates .
these are : a usman zaki house b masaba house c umaru majigi house since the beginning of bida emirate , these are the three houses that are ruling the emirate .
read also nupe dictionary who is the first etsu nupe usman zaki , became the first etsu of nupe in 1832 .
list of etsu nupe the following are the pass etsu of nupe .
they are : 1- usman zaki 1st etsu-nupe from 1832 to 1859 .
he ruled for 27 years .
masaba 2nd etsu-nupe from 1859 to 1873 .
rule for 14 years .
umaru majigi 3th from 1873 to 1884 .
ruled for 11 years .
maliki 4th from 1884 to 1895 .
ruled for 11 years .
abubakar 5th fom 1895 to 1901 .
ruled for 6 years .
muhammadu 6th from 1901 to 1916 .
ruled for 16 years .
bello 7th from 1916 to 1926 .
ruled for 10 years .
saidu 8th from 1926 to 1935 .
ruled for 9 years .
muhammadu ndayako 9th from 1935 to 1962 .
ruled for 27years .
usman sarki 10th from 1962 to 1969 .
ruled for 7 years .
musa bello 11th from 1969 to 1975 .
ruled for 6 years .
alhaji dr .
umaru sanda ndayako , from 1975 to 2003 .
read also nupe tribe 13- alhaji yahya abubakar from 2003 till date .
emir of nupe the emir nupe is the traditional title for the most superior emir of nupe land .
the emir of nupe is a first class chief .
nupes are found predominantly in niger state , which lies in the north central geo-political zone , signifying the extent of the emir s influence .
they are also found in kogi state .
who is etsu of nupe his royal highness alhaji yahya abubakar .
etsu nupe palace the etsu of nupe palace is located in bida west in niger state , along wuya-bida road , next to bida local government secretariat .
the etsu of nupe palace is referred to in local dialect of hausa as hakorin giwa , and yikan dagba in the original nupe language , interpreted in english as elephant s tusk , and it serves administrative , cultural and social purposes .
the etsu of nupe palace was constructed in about 1935 by muhammad egba .
etsu of nupe palace , among other traditional palaces holds a rich cultural heritage in the north central region of nigeria .
these are the past events that brought about the present and future of nupe emirate .
etsu nupe net worth his riyal highness alhaji yahaya abubakar has an estimated net worth of approximately 800 , 000 us dollar .
have you found this post useful or inspiring ?
do let me know your thought by commenting below .
share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram facebook twitter linkedin pinterest reddit messenger messenger whatsapp telegram share via email nupe dressing traditional titles in nupe land related articles nupe tribe nupe dressing traditional titles in nupe land nupe songs nupe film nupe language translation leave a reply cancel reply check also close nupe list of nupe names top posts list of tribes in kaduna state nupe language translation assi college of health school fees rolim school of health minna nupe tribe diploma in law in nigeria how to apply for dubai visa from nigeria taraba state university school fees how to create webmoney account in nigeria towns in kwara state categories school 149 law information 61 information 35 american information 28 kenya schools 15 nupe 14 uganda 13 biographies 10 india schools 8 fulani and hausa 8 ghana laws 6 translator 4 usa schools 3 hotels 3 debate 3 kanuri 2 copyright 2026 , all rights reserved home about us terms and conditions privacy policy disclaimer contact us back to top button close search for : close search for
nupe proverbs menu coopills search for school law information american information biographies search for home nupe nupe proverbs nupe nupe proverbs share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram nupe proverbs author by our own isyaku bala ibrahim .
check table of content .
nupe proverb from the book eganmaganzhi nupe nupe proverbs .
wo kpe nyina na , wo kpe esun à .
if you know today you do not know tomorrow .
man is ignorant of the future .
tukpapa wun è lugwa tukpa tsu à .
a reminder does not cause dumbness .
a reminder does not cause harm rather it enlightens an individual .
erwagi gan séfu , wuntso ma na kin bo à .
the crippled draws attention to stand for prayers while he is still on the floor .
show a clear commitment towards something before asking others to emulate you .
eza ù la eda ù ya tun ka kun na wun è woma egwako na kacin à wun à be à ma ù zunye .
a person should leave the stage when the ovation is loudest or else he will shamefully leave it later .
people should do things at their appropriate times .
nangi ga e za be eshigi , wun à be à ca ebi nyi gi .
any sheep that follows a dog about will soon start eating faeces .
be careful in choosing a friend or a partner as he she might positively or negatively influence your life .
eza è de ekò dan egwa ò ede ù shishikan à .
no one in possession of soap will allow it clothes to remain dirty .
with adequate resources at one s disposal , one will solve alot of problems .
wun jin za è wun kuso na wun kana à .
it is not the person that owns the forest that owns its baboon .
you cannot be in contol of everythings .
egwa la mufu lo ená ò , a ma tsukun tsá ma à wa wun ò .
it is the hand that takes an iron-stove into a fire , but it is a stick that will bring it out .
people should be careful of the negative consequences of their actions .
éyé na shi na ékó na ; zana da ù na à masha .
the night has set-in on the road ; whoever will ply it must take caution .
whatever you do not have detailed explanation on should be treated with caution .
eza è gi yiwara zo vo wun kun gwa wun à .
a person does not finish eating a cooked grain-flour meal and wriggles his hands into the plate .
you cannot reverse what has been concluded .
wun jin na eza lé be nyi na , wun è san be nyi à .
it is not what a person sleeps with , that he orshe wakes up with .
life is generally dynamic , it is subject to changes .
nyana è li li na wun è zo zo .
what is picked consistently is consistently finishing .
people should be conscious of things they constantly use , as they will certainly finish .
zandondo ù la emi ù tú égún mi nda ù .
everyone should go by their inherited family norms .
people should always respect their family ethics .
kankuru na janfuru dan nuwon ò na be tsun yikán tsun .
a hippopotamus that just enters into the water meets the fish therein .
the new arrivers should give regards or respect the old hands .
nyana saka lo égó na , wun be tsun nyana lé égó na tsun .
whatever comes into the bush early in the morning meets what slept therein .
there are differences between old and and new things is clear .
nyana è ge eza na wun ga yizheci è nanvó , nyana ma è nyí eza na wun ga è dagun ò .
what will make an individual nice is avoided and what will make him bad is happily welcomed .
people find it difficult to do the right things .
wo gá gba ezako , efo de à yi efo wotso be de ezako ye .
if you are obedient to your superior , someday you will become one .
there is wisdom behind obedience and respect of superior .
nyagbanlaci è de enyandondo à .
a jealous person does not gain anything .
there is no any benefit for being jealous .
dagan yeshi ga bo è ca eci lazhin ò .
the morning race begins from the night .
the earlier the better .
it is always better to start a task early enough to meet the targeted result early enough .
eza è yi be kanwon è sungwa ò wun tán gbako à .
a person cannot be in possession of potash and have stomach ache .
when a person has a solution to a problem it should solve it or else it should not complain afterwards .
a ga è kín ò gongi má wa , wo fe tswa ewanko .
if you are praised for being a good hay harvester , be conscious of a python .
the applauded person should be cautious of making mistakes .
zawangi wun rayi à .
a man owns not it soul .
a man is not in control of it life .
it should therefore give maximum attention to whatever comes it way as soon as possible .
dagbá ku èsà , asara yi nya esatso .
an elephant that moved away with a net , the owner bears the lost .
whoever does not own a thing will show less concern if it is missen .
wo gá la yikuru dzodzo , madán à gun ò .
if you play with grain flour you will be hungry .
a person does not joke with where it gets it daily bread .
eza wún enya à wun de ewùnzhe ?
if a person does not own a thing , will it be angry over it ?
do not get angry over what does not belong to you .
wo yi da yi lo è , wotso ma ò la bicí ò kpé .
let us move forward , while you should also hastenly lead the way .
people should lead by example .
a gan majin ényà-donci à gbín , wo gan we gbigan ényà-donci .
the leader of mortar-drummers had sunk , and you are still demanding drums to be played .
this is used when a person is off-track or beating about the bush .
zana gba ebó ye na , wun ga ebo è kunmi .
whoever belittles the right reason , it will cause it problems someday .
always make use of the right decision or suggestion .
éyé dá wun má yékorogi à .
a treated eye will not produce eye-mucus .
a problem already solved will affect no one .
yi à lo , yi à lo ; wun ga è la zhi lo lokpa ò .
we will go , we will go ; is what makes a journey far .
to start a thing is what is always difficult .
bici ù tswa éwá , éwá ma ù tswa bici .
the leg should be careful with the snake and vice versa .
showing restrend is better than hurting one another .
tswa éyé !
tswa éyé !
gá yi cigbe éyé ò .
be careful with the eye ! !
is the best eye treatment .
prevention is better than cure .
dangi emi ga è won bishe emi ò .
it is a domestic cat that catches a chicken .
when you are familiar with a thing , you will know how to target or get it .
a la hankali à tswa lafiya .
make use of reasoning to make peace .
think before you act .
egi-ena ke nyizagi na ù yi ò , na gá pani wangi ná wun à fe ba zandondo , na ma pàni wangi à na è sa fi zandondo à .
a party-candidate is like a woman ; if she does her make-up very well , everyone will like her ; and if she does not , no one will like her .
always do your homework very well before doing any given task or aspiring for any position in life .
zana gbin nuwon be èwòko na wun gá nuwon è gbin ò .
whoever smims with a gown on will be drawn .
always do things rightly and avoid ambiguity .
kabo éyé-nnakogi nyaga wo be à , wun è ceka ba egi égí .
even if the aunty s eye cannot perform witchcraft anymore , but it does frightens a child .
what people have master will not easily fade away .
eza à ce ekpà , kin yaba ?
when one shoots an arrow does the ground get out of the way ?
do not expect impossibilities .
eni è zan eje wun kan gi gi wun à .
too much soup on solid-grain porridge will not prevent it from been eaten .
what must be done cannot be avoided .
eyiwárá ga pin dan èdò , nin nyi ù yi tsa tsa è .
if a grain of corn falls in the mud , the inside is still clean .
the truth or false cannot be concealed , it will surely come to be known .
yajinci jin nyana kagbo ù kun na .
the poor should go for what he can afford .
people should live within their means .
madangunci è kpe eje sánmu ye kperi à .
a hungry person does not know poisoned food .
extreme anxiety leads to obliteration .
yajinci è kpe shikanshi ede ù ye kperi à .
the poor does not differentiate between the dirt of his clothes .
this proverb is directed at people that do not find fault in whatever they do instead blame others .
eza bo bo kpa eshigi wun latswan be à ?
wo ga è tswan-tswan-nyi , eshigi gan wun dan na .
a person cannot keep a dog and hiss again ?
for any hissing sound made , the dog appears .
when someone is fed-up with a particular situation .
kara na nyagban pa na wun è lò eti à .
the luggage sensibly arranged will not be too heavy for the head to carry .
be very logical in carryout any assignment to guard against errors or mistakes .
read also nupe songs related articles nupe dictionary nupe proverbs nupe food popular nupe wise sayings from the book nupe the people of nigeria by yahya kuta read also nupe language translation 1 .
if a child is found walking in the night , there is an elder behind him .
if a child is climbing a tree with his hands relaxed , there is an elder holding and assisting him from below .
a patient should not be in a hurry to sleep , there is enough opportunity ahead in the grave .
they had wished you to sleep with hunger , but early the next morning you were seen eating prepared rice left over with chicken .
nobody sows good seed and reaps evil , nor will anybody who sows evil ever reap good result .
whatever you sow is what you reap .
hence , you do not sow millet and reap sorghum .
a child that answers for his father will be buried ahead of his father 7 .
nowadays , religious people are many , but godly people are few .
the person preserved by god will definitely be left alone by human being .
you don t go to the river with a basket , the way you go to the river with it is the same way you return with it .
the son of the soil is doing a bad thing , but it is that of the visitor that is obvious .
whatever is meant for a toad does not climb up .
tough aliyu aliyu is like whirled wind , aliyu is like thunderous rain , aliyu stays on top of mountain and sees next year , aliyu joined a canoe and the paddler says he is going down the slope , but aliyu insists on moving up stream .
kuta donbashi !
worthy praise for the leader of fishermen no man ever praises his wife , it is in the presence of a dog that an elephant enters the bush , and it is in her presence that the elephant will come out .
it is only cricket you catch , hold and break its legs but not a scorpion .
richness is not hereditary , poverty too is not inherited , you can be rich today and get poor tomorrow and you can also be poor today and become rich tomorrow .
if god relieves your burden throw away the carrier , but if human being should assist relieve your burden hold on to your carrier .
he that assists others is only helping himself ; equally , he that cheats on others is cheating himself because whatever you do to others will be paid back to you .
who is a blind man deceiving that he is sleeping ?
is there any difference between when he is awake or when asleep ?
it is from the point where farming starts that boundary demarcation is effected .
the tick koti that cow goes for grazing with , is that which kills a lamb .
fly that moves with a leopard will never eat rotten meat .
familiarity with a chicken does not prevent its slaughtering when needed .
a newly wedded young man must not go hunting for a buffalo or else the new bride will easily become a widow .
a widow should not celebrate , what took her husband is not yet fulfilled .
we should not be too proud , because grasses are growing on a mountain while others are dying in the fadama marshy land .
love breeds happiness while hatred breeds disaster .
the dog that will miss its way will never hear the sound of the whistle of its owner .
leave the dancing stage when the ovation is loudest , or else it is shame that will follow soon .
any goat that follows dog about will soon start eating faeces 30 .
if you dig a trench for a bird it will definitely come and pass ?
read also sokodeke biography have you found this useful or inspiring ?
do let know your thought by commenting below .
share facebook twitter linkedin pinterest messenger messenger whatsapp telegram facebook twitter linkedin pinterest reddit messenger messenger whatsapp telegram share via email nupe food nupe dictionary related articles nupe film list of nupe names traditional titles in nupe land nupe dressing nupe tribe nupe language translation leave a reply cancel reply check also close nupe etsu nupe top posts list of tribes in kaduna state nupe language translation assi college of health school fees rolim school of health minna nupe tribe diploma in law in nigeria how to apply for dubai visa from nigeria taraba state university school fees how to create webmoney account in nigeria towns in kwara state categories school 149 law information 61 information 35 american information 28 kenya schools 15 nupe 14 uganda 13 biographies 10 india schools 8 fulani and hausa 8 ghana laws 6 translator 4 usa schools 3 hotels 3 debate 3 kanuri 2 copyright 2026 , all rights reserved home about us terms and conditions privacy policy disclaimer contact us back to top button close search for : close search for
xx nupe literature for a long time it was thought that the nupes possessed no literature of their own , until the discovery was made a few years ago that there were in existence in the nupe country a number of songs written in the aljemi character , and dating back about one hundred years .
this bastard arabic character called aljemi is in general use in parts of north africa , and all over the western sudan ; and although it is not at all suited to the nupe language , still it has been used as the medium of circulating poems and songs , and so the nupes can truthfully be said to be possessed of literature of their own as much as the hausas who use the same character .
this literature consists almost entirely of religious poems or songs intended to be committed to memory , and embodying the special points in mohammedanism that the mallams wished to impress upon the then pagan nupes .
some of these songs contain curious alkisions and statements which are certainly not to be found in the koran , but the mohammedanism of so many of the nupes is such a strange mixture of paganism and islam , that it is not surprising to find that their teachers were themselves in error about many things .
a specimen page of one of these songs written in the aljemi character is the frontispiece to this book , and a transcript of the same into komau characters is here given , and also the english translation .
122 a nupe song 123 tllansliteration bismi allahi arrahmani arrahimi salla allahu ala anabi alkarim .
mi ya , mi ebe yebo ya 'tsu na jin a ci ajin yi na .
soko woncin azakpe ya 'za na ga kpa u ye na .
jin a ma , jin a 'ti , kaye 'tsu na yi kagboci na .
alhamdu yebo yi ejin o ya tsoci na jin yi na .
asalatu yesi be 'yi nyi ya egi amina na u ma na .
soko ya yi 'ti , ii ya yi 'gwa , to bici , yi ejin yebo .
etsu ga jin yere giitwani fi ninmi naka 'za bo .
aba jiya ga , ye kpe ze eta nupe ci ejin yebo ' ?
abu bakari egi anasi ci ekoni , ci ejin yebo .
yesi be 'yi nyi godewa ya tsoci na jin yi na .
tsoci u jin anabawazi jin ya egi makaci .
tsoci u jin malaylkazi jin ya egi makaci .
tsoci u jin 'fe , u jin 'na , to nuwon ya egi makaci .
tunci soko yi a gba o , mahamadii egi makaci .
yesi be yi nyi yi eyi wun o , ezako na ba yi na .
soko tsoci yi eba lafiya na dokuii na .
soko tsoci yi eba 'nya , to rakun na a la kara yi na .
soko ga iwo eli yi ma , wo ya yi 'nya na yi eba na .
soko u la yi lo maka , yi a da ezi nya egi amina .
madina tsa a eyi wun o , 'ba na a tu 'mi zi bo na .
5 , yi ba u 'bo swalihu bo , wo ya yi ebo sarijisu bo .
yi ba u 'bo lukmanu bo , wo ya yi ebo zalikifulu bo .
yi ba u 'bo yunusa bo , wo ya yi ebo sofuwanu bo .
yi ba u 'bo mahamadu bo , wo ya yi ebo asabuhu uzi bo .
wo ya yi gwaga 'fo mi 'ku nyi , na ke yi ga be ena nyi na , etc .
124 nupe grammar translation in the name of god , the merciful , the compassionate , may god bless the generous prophet .
i have begun , i am adding thanks to the king who made them and us .
god is great and surpasses all those who think on him .
he makes them to rejoice and to cry , the name of the mighty king .
alhamdu , praise we are giving to the lord who made us .
prayer night and day to the son born to amina .
god gave us a head , he also gave us hands and feet , and we are thankful .
that king made nine apertures in the body of man .
aba jiya says .
do you know those who speak nupe and are giving thanks ?
abu bakari the son of anasi is singing and giving thanks .
night and day we give thanks to the lord who made us .
the lord made the prophets for the son of mecca .
the lord made the angels for the son of mecca .
the lord made wind , and fire , and w ater for the son of mecca .
the apostle of god we will worship , mohammed the son of mecca .
night and day we call on him , the mighty one who pleases us .
lord god , we are begging for liealth that is abundant .
lord god , we are begging for something , and a camel to carry our load .
the song patience 125 god , regard not our ways , but grant us what we are begging for .
mny god bring us to mecca ; we are going to the city of amina's son .
it is called medina itself , the place where homes are prepared .
we beg for it for swalihu's sake ; grant it to us for sarijisu's sake .
we beg for it for lukman's sake ; grant it to us for zu-alkifulu's sake .
we beg for it for jonah's sake ; grant it to us for sofuwanu's sake .
we beg for it for mohammed's sake ; grant it to us for his companions' sake .
give us an escape in the day of hades , whereby we shall escape the fire .
patience this song was written by a nupe mallam in the aljemi character .
for notes see p .
1310 1 .
nyizagizi bazagizi , ye wo 'ni be 'mi nupe nyi .
eza na wo na jiii hankuri .
hankuri ma , ii ci zo nyi jin .
yiya eni ana da na , waziin la u jin ya eti mi o .
hankuri ma , u ci zo nyi jin .
mi re - jin asalatii ya anabizi be hankuri nyi .
mi re jin ya swabezi be hankuri nyi .
mi re jin ya eya mizi be hankuri nyi .
mi re jin ya yegi mizi be hankuri nyi .
hankuri ma , u ci zo nyi jin .
126 nupe grammar 8 .
soko g-a wo de o , jin hankuri .
anabi ga wo de o , jin hankuri .
dide wo de o , jin hankuri .
kag-a wo de a , jin hankuri .
hankuri ma , u ci z6 nyi jin .
nyimi wo de o , jin hankuri .
egi wo de o , jin hankuri .
lafiya wo de o , jin hankuri .
bata wo de o , jin hankuri .
hankuri ma , u ci zo nyi jin .
masoyi wo de o , jin hankuri .
makiri wo de o , jiii hankuri .
bide karatuii , jin hankuri .
dide litafi , jin hankuri .
hankuri ma , u ci zo nyi jin .
karatmiwuci , jin hankuri .
karatunjinci , jin hankuri .
ecun-alheriloci , jin hankuri .
etun-'giinloci , jin hankuri .
hankuri ma , u ci zo nyi jiii .
eriatwaci , jin hankuri .
nyabotaci , jiii hankuri .
nyayedaci , jin hankuri .
talaka ma , jin hankuri .
hankuri ma , u ci zo nyi jin .
etsu kami ana , jin hankuri .
alikali kami ana , jin hankuri .
ekuiigunci , jin hankuii .
fataucijinci , jin hankuri .
hankuri ma , u ci zo nyi jiii .
eba be ya we , jin hankuri .
eba pin ya we , jin hankuri .
yeg'i mizi si tukpa , jin hankuri .
ye wo eni ana , eza na wo na , jin hankuri .
hankuri ma , u ci zo nyi jin .
the song ''patience 127 10 .
gugo wo sala , jin hankuri .
gugo wo aziimi , jin hankuri .
alijenaloci , jin hankuri .
enaloci , jin hankuri .
hankuri ma , u ci zo nyi jin .
cinwpn anabawa , jin hankuri .
cinwon woli , jin hankuri .
zunyesunci , jin hankuri .
zunyecimboci , jin hankuri .
girimankayiwoci , jin hankuri .
ledabideci , jin hankuri .
hankuri ma , u ci zo nyi jin .
tibideci , jin hankuri .
etimananci , jin hankuri .
zabokoci , jin hankuri .
gacincinci , jin hankuri .
hankuri ma , u ei zo nyi jin , 13 .
yizewaci , jin hankuri .
ekuwaci , jin hankuri , cinwon wo de o , jin hankuii .
gbigba wo de o , jin hankuri .
hankuii ma , u ci zo nyi jin .
manajinci , jin hankuri .
manaawoei , jin hankuri .
cewo re gi 'le , jin hankuri .
cewo re zun ya , jin hankuri .
hankuri ma , u ci zo nyi jin .
gasikiyataci , jin hankuri .
gamanazunci , jin hankuri .
za na jin hankuri na , u ga afo .
za na jin a na , u ga ay a .
hankuri ma , u ci zo nyi jin .
128 nupe grammar 16 .
musulumizi , jin hankuri .
kafirizi , jin hankuri .
kaga enikoci ana de lada a , asia ma u ga de zunubi a .
hankuri ma , u ci zo nyi jin .
larabawazi , ko be hankuri nyi .
hausawazi , ko be hankuri nyi .
gojrizi , ko be hankuri nyi .
acin ma mi go ma be hankuri nyi .
hankuri ma , u ci zo nyi jin .
etsu ye re wa gafara be hankuri nyi .
u re wa ye go u mi be hankuri nyi .
ze eko 'ni ana be hankuri nyi .
kantici , ko be hankuri nyi .
hankuri ma , u ci zo nyi jin .
mi ko 'ni ko be hankuri nyi .
bati bati siba gutota be hankuri nyi .
hankuri ma , u ci zo nyi jin .
translation 1 .
women and men , listen to a song in niipe .
he who hears , be patient .
patience is good , but it is so hard to be patient .
the origin of this song was my desire to preach .
patience is good , but it is so hard to be patient .
i am praying to the prophets with patience .
i am praying to the companions with patience .
i am praying to my friends with patience .
i am praying to my brethren with patience .
patience is good , but it is so hard to be patient .
have you god , be patient .
have you the prophet , be patient .
the song ''patience 129 have you plenty , be patient .
if you have not , be patient .
patience is good , but it is so hard to be patient .
have you a wife , be patient .
have you a child , be patient .
have you liealth , be patient .
have you sickness , be patient .
patience is good , but it is so hard to be patient .
have you friends , be patient .
have you enemies , be j tient .
having learning , be patient .
having books , be patient .
patience is good , but it is so hard to be patient .
teacher , be patient .
scholar , be patient .
worker of good , be patient .
worker of evil , be patient .
patience is good , but it is so hard to be patient .
philanthropist , be patient .
miser , be patient .
inquisitive man , be patient .
poor man , be patient .
patience is good , but it is so hard to be patient .
the king of tliese times , be patient .
the judge of these times , be patient .
warrior , be patient .
trader , be patient .
patience is good , but it is so hard to be patient .
is the place wide for you , be patient .
is the place narrow for you , be patient .
my brethren , listen with patience .
listen ye to this song , and let him who hears be patient .
patience is good , but it is so hard to be patient .
1 130 nupe grammar 10 .
the one who can perform the devotions , be patient the one who can keep the fast , be patient .
the one going to heaven , be patient .
the one going to hell , be patient .
patience is good , but it is so hard to be patient .
the honour of a prophet , be patient .
the honour of a saint , be patient .
one with sliame , be patient .
one without shame , be patient .
one without reputation , be patient .
one with politeness , be patient .
patience is good , but it is so hard to be patient .
unluck one , be patient .
lucky one , be patient .
slanderer , be patient .
proverbial is t , be patient .
patience is good , but it is so liard to be patient .
worldling , be patient .
other-world-seeker , be patient .
have you honour , be patient .
have you dishonour , be patient .
patience is good , but it is so hard to be patient .
grateful one , be patient .
ungrateful one , be patient .
successful trader , be patient .
unsuccessful trader , be patient .
patience is good , but it is so hard to be patient .
truthteller , be patient .
liar , be patient .
he who is patient shall be saved .
he who is not , shall be lost .
patience is good , but it is so hard to be patient .
moslems , be patient .
heathen , be patient .
the beatitudes 131 if this sodg has no reward ; indeed , neither will it be a sin .
patience is good , but it is so hard to be patient .
arabs , sing it with patience .
hausas , sing it with patience .
fulanis , sing it with patience .
i also receive it with patience .
patience is good , but it is so haid to be patient .
your king wants forgiveness with patience .
he wants you to answer him with patience .
who is singing this song with patience ?
countrjaiian , sing it with patience .
patience is good , but it is so hard to be patient .
i have sung this song with patience .
forty-eight verses with patience .
patience is good , but it is so hard to be patient .
1 bazagi was evidently the original form of bagi .
another sign of age is the use of the almost obsolete re for the present continuous tense .
a good example of the fondness of the nupes for a cognate object to form an alliteration .
' the phrase of this time is added , as kimj ind judge are so frequently used of god .
5 a curious double plural , larabawa being already in the plural without the zi .
the beatitudes matthew v .
1-12 1 .
na jesu le eza kama ye na , acin u da gun pati o : kami na u fedun na , 2 .
eza zimma iizi be ba u : i kpe emi u wu a 'ga , ga , 8 .
mawo da be a nyi nazi da nyagban o na ; gama sarota nya sama yi nya a .
mawo da be a nyi nazi etigi na .
gama a a de nyagbanfa .
132 nupe grammar 5 .
mawo da be haiiknrijiiicizi nyi : gama a a gi 'gun yize .
mawo da be a nyi nazi egun mada to noiiwo nya eli gasikiya na : garna a ga afuiiin .
mawo da be ezayeguncizi nyi : gama a a de yegiin go- 8 .
mawo da be eza nyagban iilieizi nyi : gama a a ie soko ye .
mawo da be ewiingacizi nyi : gama a a yi a egizi nya soko .
mawo da be a nyi nazi a gasun ebo gasikiya o na : gama sarota nya sama yi nya a .
mawo da be ye nyi kami na eza a gi ye toko na , to na a ga ye sim na , to na a gaga dede titititi eti ye bo na , na yi ganiana na , ebo mi bo .
ye manin , ye fe manin doknn : gama iada ye dokuii ninmi sama o : gamasi acinga a ga anabizi sim o , nazi si ye dzo na .
1 corinthians xiii 1 .
ka mi ga gaga be ezi misunzi nyi nya ezawangizi to nya malayikazi , mi ei de cincin a na , mi aze ke efiii na etiwd na , ko kiile na eti gongonyi na .
ka mi ga de eriatwa nya waziinjin mi ei kpe enyasusocizi ye kpata , to kpikpe kpata ; ka mi ga de egago kpata , hari mi la patikozi kiabo wo , mi ei de cincin a na , mi yi enya ndondo a .
ka mi ga la dukiya mi ga kpata ya talakazi , ka mi ga iugwa a la naka mi din 'na ya , mi ei de cincin a na , u jin mi anfani ndondo a .
cincin de hankuri dokun .
ci ejin alheri ; cincin ela nyagban a ; cincin ejiii fari a ; 5 .
wun ewogi a , wmi ejin 'nya na go u nyi a na a , wun ewa 'nya nya 'ti wimtso a , wun ezewuii a , wim ekpaye iefi a ; 6 .
v un emanin ninmi eli dede bo a , ama wun emanin ninmi gasikiya o ; 7 .
wun ejin hankuri be enya ndondo nyi , wun ela gasikiya ya enya ndondo , wun etu 'nya ye be enya ndondo nyi , wmi ewu nyagban be enya ndondo nyi .
cincin ezo a : ama the lord's prayer 133 ka wazunjin ga da bo , wun a gog-a ; ka ezi misim tititlti ga da bo , a ga azo ; ka kpikpe ga da bo , u ga azo 'ti .
gama yi kpe gafi ye , yi ma ejin waziin nya gafi .
ama kami na enya na yi giingura na ga be na , eiiya iia yi gafi na ga agoga .
kami na mi yi dzakangi na , mi gaga dzakangi , mi kpaye dzakangi , mi de yema dzakangi : gbani na mi aze bagi na , mi la eli dzakangi ku ya .
gama gbani yi ie 'ba ye ninmi bayele o biribiri ; ama kanga eye be eye nyi : gbani mi kpe gafi ye ; ama kanga mi a kpe kpata ye , kendo na a kpe mi ye kpata na .
gbani wun ake egago , to yetu , to cincin , giita na da ana , ama na ga dozi ninmi nanazi o na , sayi cincin .
the lord's prayer nda yi na da sama o na , kaye we lilici u yi o .
muiiki we u be .
yi jin enya na we wa na ninmi yize o , kendo na a jin u ninmi sama o na , ya yi enyagici yi nyina , nya nyina .
jin yi gafara lefi yi , kendo na yi jin eza nazi jin yi lefi gafara na .
ga la yi 16 da ninmi mima- cinle 0 ma , ama ke yi ga be ibili nji : ebo muiiki yi nya we , to kagbo , to cinwon , hari io .
xxi some proverbs and common sayings 1 za iia tsu na , wuii ga edin zezi ke na gwa o : tlie one who died first is the one who is dragging down the rest .
2 aliibasa , wuii ego li iiya nuwon a : an onion does not take tiie character of water i . e .
a child is not always like its parents .
3 a wii nusa ga , tsiiii gi a : they don't teacli old people how to take food cp .
don't teach your grandmother , etc .
4 ajin a ta 'ga 'mi kansana ?
: can a person talk with a dry mouth ?
i . e .
a person wants to be fed before he can work .
5 pegi degi acin sokogunci wo gbata 'ku o : little by little the leper pays his debt to the grave i .
by losing his fingers , etc .
6 asiada ii ka 'za nyi gi a : slander does not hinder a person from eating .
7 asara , wun ga eka maza ka bolanci o : misfortune is what holds back the energetic man to wait for the feeble man .
8 ewo da 'ga ke nuwon da 'gun na : money softens a dispute as water softens clay .
134 proverbs and common sayings 135 9 kendo na cecengi yi na , acing'a imwon yi o : acconlidg to the size of the blister , so is the amount of water i .
things are jnst as tliey appear .
j 0 kaga enya ta nuwon bo a , zungbere a lo 'kpan a : unless there is . somelhing on the water the ants won't cross ovei- i .
there is a reason for every- thing .
11 bataci ii iwo kagboci a : a shppery place pays no attention to a strong man i .
he can fall as easily as anyone else .
12 ega ekpa 'na kpa , wim ekiin wun a : a fold only shelters the flock , it doesn't sell them i .
to have is not to own .
1 3 soko na sa 'mi na wuii a te wun a : god who made the mouth v 'ill not close it up .
14 kaga egi tigi a , a la u ?
: if the child doesn't cry will it be carried ?
i . e .
nothing is given without asking for it .
1 5 daga fiimf lu uyi , acin a ka nyika o : when the hsh is fresh is the time to bend it i .
trani a child wdiile it is young .
16 a kpe te ke sami elii nuwon na a ci ku 'wo da si u pet 2 : le know that a sieve leaks and yet they go and buy it .
17 katamba woncin la gbodonji gbaye a : a large p'ach does not despise the clay pit from which it was dug .
18 yize gbangba yi ele gbani o : we are living in the age of ducks now i .
young ducks run on ahead of the old ones , so do tlie children of to-day .
136 nupe grammar 19 a la cigbe gbako jin nya 'ti a : they don't give stomach medicine for a pain in the head .
don't beat about the bush .
20 gbako nusa bo a tun nyasa o : into the liearts of old people they tip rubbish i .
old people are compelled to listen to reports both good and evil .
21 diiini gba 'ka ?
: do flies follow charcoal ?
will one work for another when he is not likely to get anything for it ?
22 ajin a si nugiin ya kparo ?
: can they make a boundary line for the partridge ?
23 ajin a gbin 'do ga a ci fi u 'yi ?
: do they ask permission of the granary to put corn in it ?
of course not , it was built for that purpose .
24 ajin a wo duku nuwon keze ?
: do they turn back at hearing the noise of the water ?
don't be easily discouraged .
25 man na de fiila dara a na , ga , enya ga ele a 'ti : the pritst who has not got a red fez cap says , that thing makes the head itch cp .
the fox and the grapes .
26 ajin a gba 'zako go cami ?
: do tlie lollow a great man to receive only his blessing ?
they want something more sub- stantial than that .
27 nyagban kin ba ii jin eli kin ba a : the body prostrated on the ground does not make humility .
proverbs and common sayings 137 28 yekpa dede a kpa a ci tu kata 'ti te o : it was a bad thought that made them build a fire- proof house i .
taking precautions means that you suspect .
29 soko kun , swafa manin : when it thun . , zunma .
again , adv . , be ; da .
against , rrcp . , ba .
agent , ? l , bilali .
agree , to , r . , g-ba ; jin yeda ; ye .
agreement , n . , alikawoli ; ega la-sisi .
5 to 1 iake , r . , jin alikawo- li ; la ega sisi .
aid , v , , ce .
air , n . , efe .
alas , wtcrj . , kasa .
albino , n . , biabia .
alike , adv . , gangani .
alive , to be , r . .
da bo ; da rayi o .
all , adj . , kpata .
all right , intcrj . , to .
allow , v . , lugwa .
almost , adv . , ke degi .
alms , 01 . , sadaka .
, to give , v . , jin sadaka .
already , adv . , ani .
always , adv . , kami ndondo ; ka ndondo ; ka ka ndondo .
amen , n . , ami .
ammunition , n . , alisa .
among , jjrc j . , tacin ; tata- cin ; ninmi .
amulet , n . , laya .
and , conj . , to ; ci .
angel , n . , malayika .
anger , n . , ewiin ; fusi .
angry , to be , v . , zewun ; jin fusi .
ankle , n . , bici kukungi .
annoy , v . , ga .
annoyance , n . , sunga .
another , adj . , ndoci .
answer , v . .
mi ; ze ant , n . , ziinziingi .
, white , n . , eka .
ant-hill , n . , gana ; kaji ; dakiin .
antimony , n . , tanzari .
anxiety , oi . , wanikosa .
anxious , to be , v . , sa wa- niko .
any , adj . , ndondo .
apparel , n . , enyadzuci ; tiifuwa .
appear , v . , dzim ; dziin be .
to seem , v . , beke .
argue , v . , gbomi .
arise , v . , nakin .
arm , n . , egwa ; egwa ci- gban .
armpit , n . , lukuntata .
arms , n . , enya 'kun .
around , to go , v . , ma .
keze ; ma ceze .
arouse , v . , sa .
le ; sa .
arrange , v . , tadzu .
arrest , v . .
arrive , v . , tim bo .
arrogance , n . , etigbo .
nupe vocabulary 153 arrogant , to be , v . , gboti ; jin gaga , arrow , n . , ekpa .
artery , n . , ediii .
article , n . , enya .
as , adv . , kendo na .
na ; kemi na .
na ; ke .
ascend , v . , gun ; gun 'fiii .
back , n . , ziinma .
, , , to come , v . , zin .
, , , to go , v . , lo zimma .
bad , adj . , dede .
, to be rotten , v . , v6 .
bag grass , ? i . , boma ; gu- ra ; jika .
leather , n . , gafaka ; namba .
ashamed , to be , v . , sunzu- ; baggage , n . , kara .
ashes , n . , tutumpere .
charcoal , ebu .
bake , v . , nya .
bald , to be , v . , fu 'ti .
baldheaded , adj . , etifu .
grass , bibiri ; na- bale , v . , se ; to ; ku ya .
bamboo , n . , gusa .
of burnt building , j banish , v . , nya .
ask , v . , gbin .
assist , v . , ce .
astonish , v . , ka .
. -ye .
at once , ad . v . , bid eni ; gbogiani .
aunt paternal ; , n . , maci- nnia .
maternal , n . , knagi .
authorize , v . , ya yiko .
authority , n . , yiko ; yiku- nci .
avenge , v . , jin .
ga ; ga .
awaken , to , v . , sale ; satu .
axe , 7 , , egba .
b babe , n . , egi mamangi .
baboon , n . , gbogi .
banjo , n . , dunguru .
bank , sand , n . , gunji .
, steep , n . , baba ; gakpan .
, , , opposite , n . , ekpan .
banner , n . , tuta .
barber , n . , gozan , bargain , v . , cewo .
bark , n . , kpara .
v . , gbo .
barn , n . , edo .
bashful , to be , v . , sunzu- nye ; de ziinye .
bashfulness , n . , zunye ; zu- nyesuii .
basket , corn , n . , giinmi .
, fowl , gudugudu ; luka .
, rough , kasa .
, clothes , kunkuru .
bat , house , n , pitingi .
, fruit , eda .
154 nupe vocabulary bathe , v . , fu nuwon .
battle , 01 . , ekun .
, , , to join , v . , guiikun .
be , to , v . , da ; da .
bo ; fi .
bo' , beak , n . , nukpa .
bean , n . , ezo .
bear to give birth to , v . , ma .
as fruit , v . , sun .
, , as guinea-corn , v . , wa 'ti .
, , as bananas , i' . , si 'ti .
, , as ground-nuts , v .
as yams , v . , sa .
beard , n . , nukpayi .
beardless , adj . , siag'iri , beast , n . , daba ; nyakiingi beat tlog , v . , wu .
drum , v . , ni ; ni 'nya .
, , pound , v . , pa .
overcome , i ? . , jin na- sara .
because , co ? iy , , ebo .
bo ; ebo na .
na ; gama ; gamasi .
become , v . , ze .
bed , ? ? , , g-ado .
bed-bug , n . , jigangi .
bee , 01 . , efu .
beer , oi . , ege .
beetle , t . , pibimpibi .
before place , loo ep . , ye- gboro ; yita .
time , adv . , bedzo ; ke .
beg , v . , tagwa ; ba .
beget , v . , ma .
beggar , o . , barajinci .
begin , v . , ya ; ca .
behead , v . , ba 'ti .
behold , v . , cinle .
believe , v . , go 'ga ; la ga- sikiya ya ; yakpe .
bell , 01 . , kule ; esa .
, small , ? i . , tsanganagi , bellow , v . , kpogun .
bellows , 01 . , gurii .
belly , 01 . , gbako .
belly-band , saddle-girth , t . , esadin .
q ow , prep . , tako .
bench , oi . , esa .
bend , v . , ya .
bent , to be , v . , ka .
best , adj . , ge ga kpata .
betray , v . , jin rikici .
betroth , v . , tuba .
better , to be , v . , gama ; gama ga ; ge ga .
between , po ei . , tacin ; ta- tacin ; ninmi .
bewail , v . , ti lali .
beware , ' . , tswa .
bicycle , n . , doko nyankpa .
big , adj . , woncinko .
, to be , v . , gbo ; wonci .
bind , v . , pa .
bird , n . , elu .
bird-cage , oi . , karaga nya elu .
bird's nest , ? ? . , esa nya elu .
biscuit , oi . y kara , bit bridle , oi . , dzami .
a piece , oi . , tukiin nupe vocabulary lo5 bite , v . , ko nyika .
black , adj . , ziko .
, , , to be , v . , siziko .
black mad , n . , eza ziko ; epa ziko .
blacksmith , n . , tswaci ; tswaci gbagba .
blacksmith's siiop , n . , tswata .
blanket , n . , borogo .
blaspheme , v . , qi toko dede .
bleed , v . , ti 'gia .
blemish , oi . , eani .
blind ma i , n . , yebonci .
blindne s .
n . , yebo ; yeria .
blink , v . , ba-ye .
blood , n . , egia .
blossom , v . , la koro .
n . , korola .
blow as the wind , v . , ku ; tswa .
into , v . , be .
at , v . , zim ; yi .
'f e ; ke .
the nose , v . , la 'ein nya .
blue , light , adj . , dofa .
, , , dark , adj . , ziko .
blunt , to be , v . , tsiin 'mi .
boast , v . y jin aluwasi ; jin fari ; ziba ; wogi .
boat , n . , eya .
boatman , n . , eyapaci .
body , n . , eba ; naka .
bog , n . , mada ; bada .
boil , n . , sun .
, , , v . , gbin .
to cook , v . , du .
bold , to be , impudent , -y . , cin zuiiye bo .
bondage , n . , wuzi .
bone , n . , tsiikiin .
book , . , litafi .
sc ' sandal , borrow money or food , v . , ma .
to be returned , v . , jin arc .
both , adj . , gubaba .
bother , v . , gasun ; jin fitina .
bottle , n . , kpalaba .
bow of boat , n . , eyami .
, ? i . , tanci .
, , , v . , ya 'ti .
bowels , n . , edziigi .
bowl , n . , tasa .
bowleggcd person , n . , edu- nkaci .
box , n . , kpati .
boy , n . , egi bagi .
bracelet , n . , enyagwada .
glass , n . , kara- wii .
1 ; namba numeral ah be glyph wun yi'o .
wunga yi chaba toh nan gbagba gan mini integers nyan infinite sequence nyan natural numbers bo .
egwawu nana zhi la wun'a de lulo ya dana ndoci zhi'o , dagan science lo sport zhi'o , nan wun'e gikini ya chaba koma , yegboro koma nyan eti mini enan'o .
1 ga yi kakancha nyan enyanba koma eman'o , giniki nyan singular nouns zhi , ah be gender-neutral pronoun .
eba etan'o , kinigi nyan 1 zheban dagan ancient sumerian toh babylonian symbols zhi lo modern arabic numerals .
10 , even natural number nan ta zuman 9 chi dan yegboro 11 bo nan wun yi'o .
ten ga yi base nyan decimal numeral system'o , system nyan denoting numbers nan dokun eba ezhimi nan ah ka che gba nan .
10 , 000 maniacs yi enan eniko nyan rock nyan nan ah de eya 1981 nan .
ah ya fefe studio guwo , fefe ep 6 , ah be fefe live 5 .
ah de ele wangi ela 1987 lo 1993 , nan ah ya fefe guni na ta fiti nyan 50 chart'o kin us'o nan : in my tribe 1987 , blind man's zoo 1989 , our time in eden 1992 , ah be fefe live mtv unplugged 1993 .
kamina ah ko fefe nyan ama kafi ah ya'u nan mtv unplugged nan , za nan yi nusa nyan eniko wuncin natalie merchant nan enan wuncin ya gan wun'a da ko eni wuntso gba'ugi , gancin zana kena zhi gogan be eniko'a nyin .
100 meters ; koma 100 meters dash , santana chimney wun yi'o .
mini sangana den nan jin tetengi gan nan wun yi'o . 100 meters 109 . 36 yd , dash dan mini sangana nan tiye gan mini edzo echiman'o nan .
wun de sanagana jin ya summer olympics dagan 1896 , ya bagi zhi chi de sanagana jin ye ela 1928 , gwata inzaghi'o . inaugural championship yi eya 1983 .
100 meters koma 100 meter dash yi sangana nyan field nan'e jin denbo nan . wun ga yi edzo fili nyan echi nan ah kpeye gbagba gan nan'o , 100 metre 109 . 36 yd , dash wun dan mini sangana echi nan tiye chi kezhe de kpataki sanagana athletics'o nan .
wun de jinjin summer olympics dagan 1896 , ya bagi zhi chi cha 1928 , ya inzagi zhi .
ah jin inaugural world championship eya 1983 .
101955 bennu 1999 rq36 , carbonaceous asteroid wun yi dan apollo group nan linear project leye ela 11 september 1999 , nan wun yi'o .
nyangagi nan de kpikpa bana dokun nan wun yi'o chi de highest cumulative ratings dagan palermo scale'o .
wun de cumulative chance nyan 1-in-1 , 750 nyan impact on earth tsakani 2178 lo 2290 , be risk nyan 2182 ela 24 september'e .
wun de sunna b mmennu , elugi kin egypt nyan payin nan de ecingi be yigidi , tswistwa ah be yiyeman'e nan .
101st airborne division ; assault , screaming eagles , gwalagi mini united states army nan la eye dan air assault operation zhi nan wun yi'o .
ah tswa 101st tswa ya kpikpe , yiyejin ah be lilatinya brigade-sized air assault operation zhi nan'e jin dan bazhiko nan , dan ekpalo 500 nautical miles 926 kilometres , che wan terrains wunciko zhi ya efo 14 zhi .
eya gbani zhi'o 101st fe lotun foreign internal affairs and counterterrorism operation kin iraq , afghanistan ela 2015 lo 2016 , nyin gani be syria'e mini etun nan lo eti lulu dozhi nyan 2018-2021 , bo nan .
william leonard roberts ii ah kpe'u ye tswafo gbanwo din guba nyan january , 1976 , nan ah kpeye etun'o ke rick ross nan , rapper nyan kin america wun yi'o ah be nusa emi eni , eyesanci wun yi dan eni bayetin nyan hip hop bo , rick ross de yeti be eni nan'e du ba nan , larger than life , ah be enikaci wangi zhi , eni'u zhi yi eti dagan wala'o lo eman , che ji ewo , zankpe , dukiya be emanwo'e ye .
right-wing politics , cincinle nyan siyasa nan'e la doka sashi zhi so , sashi dede koma nan'a wa nan , musanman ya ebo ga dan conservatism , natural law , wiwa dukiya , kagbo , dukiya , adini , ah be didan .
hierarchy koma mulki nan jin dede'a nan dan mini ezhe nyan ganasa eti woce toh ewo ku yekan'o .
rio de janeiro koma rio , wunga yi ezhiti nyan eka rio de janeiro .
wunga yi ezhiko nan de eza sunsun gan nyan baci kin brazil'o nan zuman são paulo chi yi nyan tswanyin chi kin america zhi'o .
riyadh , wunga yi ezhiti toh ezhiko nan wancin gan kin saudi arabia'o nan .
wunga kezhe yi ezhiti riyadh province chi kezhe yi tacin riyadh governorate be .
wun chi kosun nyan yilozun wadi hanifa'o , dana metropolis nan tinya dagan 1950 zhi nan ya tintinya 18th century walled , kamina dana ekunkan zhi be gansan nan .
ronaldo de assis moreira ah man'u tswafo shi din guba nyan march , 1980 , nan ah kpeye be ronaldinho gaúcho brazilian portuguese : onaw d ĩ u a u u , koma ronaldinho , bolu bici kpataki chechi nyan kin brazil wun yi'o , nan fe che tacin nan , wun kezhe be da kpangwa yigboro .
nan ah kpeye ke bolu che chi kpataki yizhe kpata nyan eka kpata nan , wun gi fifa world cup guba ah be riatwa ballon d'or .
wun gba'ugi ga yi bolu chechi nan gi world , copa américa , confederations cup , champions league , copa libertadores ah be ballon d'or .
gorozo bolu nyan yizhe kaman , ronaldinho de ciwan ebo bolu mance , yeman , bolu la dzodzo ah be kpadeyin nyan free kick dan , kendo wun'e lo yeman , ah be pass nyan eyeche ah be bolu la fu ti za'e nan , keba be etigi be eti tswa'e , kendo wun ma bolu che dagan zakanbo nyanba'u yinan la ah chi tu sunan o bruxo the wizard .
ruggero pasquarelli ah man'u 10 september 1993 , nan ah kpeye be mononym ruggero'e na , enikoci toh edzo yesan chi kin italian wun yi'o .
eya 2010 , wun jin sangana dan edzo namba nici italian talent nan ah kpeye be x factor'e gbani nan , ah man kezhe kpe'u ye be federico edzo yesan argentine telenovela violetta'e 2012 2015 , ah be matteo balsano edzo yesan soy luna'o 2016 2018 .
ruwayda , ezhi nan nyin ya chi yilazhin qatar bo nan wun yio .
chi epe 2 . 5 km ta eko , wun de eba qatar na nyan dudugi tsukun chi kezhe de dana etswa .
ezhi wuncin de ezazhi fe le bo ela 1500 zhi lo zuman 1700 zhi
sadeq ahmed qasem arabi : ; ah man'u eya 1984 kuwait o , wochechi be enyan tswaci nyan kuwait wun yi'o , ah kpe'u ye taki'u zhi , enyantswaci nyan arab ah be tswangi nyan science'i , be etun alchemist yanba'u nan ah wu sangana science nan qatar foundation for education la chichi nan , science toh yegborolo ezhi .
ah man saidat adegoke illorin'o , gwalo yilozun kin nigeria'o ela efo shi be guni nyan etswa eminwan 1985 , wun yi bolu bici chechi kpataki nyan kin nigeria'o .
etun adegoke yi bolu bici chechi kpataki , egi kin nigeria'o .
ela 2007 , nyin wun cha bolu nyin che ya remo queens dagan ezhimi nigeria'o , sangana italian series a bo ya acf trento sangana 16 bo , wun gi eti guta chi ya baga bedzo eminwan , 2008 , lo acf milan .
milan bo , wun'a de bibe chi ya baga eya 2011 , bana wun gi eti 19 edzo 52 bo nan .
chaba nyan sangana 2011-12 , bo wun lo fcf como eya 2000 .
wun che yegboro toh gwalo .
kin den dagan eya 2010 , wun dan mini enan bolu bici chechi inazagi nyan kin nigeria'o ya sangana kin den .
